The Importance of Being Earnest
A Trivial Comedy for Serious People


THE PERSONS IN THE PLAY


John Worthing, J.P.
Algernon Moncrieff
Rev. Canon Chasuble, D.D.
Merriman, Butler
Lane, Manservant
Lady Bracknell
Hon. Gwendolen Fairfax
Cecily Cardew
Miss Prism, Governess




THE SCENES OF THE PLAY


ACT I.  Algernon Moncrieff's Flat in Half-Moon Street, W.

ACT II.  The Garden at the Manor House, Woolton.

ACT III.  Drawing-Room at the Manor House, Woolton.

TIME: The Present.




LONDON: ST. JAMES'S THEATRE


Lessee and Manager: Mr. George Alexander

February 14th, 1895

* * * * *

John Worthing, J.P.: Mr. George Alexander.
Algernon Moncrieff: Mr. Allen Aynesworth.
Rev. Canon Chasuble, D.D.: Mr. H. H. Vincent.
Merriman: Mr. Frank Dyall.
Lane: Mr. F. Kinsey Peile.
Lady Bracknell: Miss Rose Leclercq.
Hon. Gwendolen Fairfax: Miss Irene Vanbrugh.
Cecily Cardew: Miss Evelyn Millard.
Miss Prism: Mrs. George Canninge.




FIRST ACT


SCENE


Morning-room in Algernon's flat in Half-Moon Street.  The room is
luxuriously and artistically furnished.  The sound of a piano is heard in
the adjoining room.

[Lane is arranging afternoon tea on the table, and after the music has
ceased, Algernon enters.]

Algernon.  Did you hear what I was playing, Lane?

Lane.  I didn't think it polite to listen, sir.

Algernon.  I'm sorry for that, for your sake.  I don't play
accurately--any one can play accurately--but I play with wonderful
expression.  As far as the piano is concerned, sentiment is my forte.  I
keep science for Life.

Lane.  Yes, sir.

Algernon.  And, speaking of the science of Life, have you got the
cucumber sandwiches cut for Lady Bracknell?

Lane.  Yes, sir.  [Hands them on a salver.]

Algernon.  [Inspects them, takes two, and sits down on the sofa.]  Oh! . . .
by the way, Lane, I see from your book that on Thursday night, when
Lord Shoreman and Mr. Worthing were dining with me, eight bottles of
champagne are entered as having been consumed.

Lane.  Yes, sir; eight bottles and a pint.

Algernon.  Why is it that at a bachelor's establishment the servants
invariably drink the champagne?  I ask merely for information.

Lane.  I attribute it to the superior quality of the wine, sir.  I have
often observed that in married households the champagne is rarely of a
first-rate brand.

Algernon.  Good heavens!  Is marriage so demoralising as that?

Lane.  I believe it _is_ a very pleasant state, sir.  I have had very
little experience of it myself up to the present.  I have only been
married once.  That was in consequence of a misunderstanding between
myself and a young person.

Algernon.  [Languidly_._]  I don't know that I am much interested in your
family life, Lane.

Lane.  No, sir; it is not a very interesting subject.  I never think of
it myself.

Algernon.  Very natural, I am sure.  That will do, Lane, thank you.

Lane.  Thank you, sir.  [Lane goes out.]

Algernon.  Lane's views on marriage seem somewhat lax.  Really, if the
lower orders don't set us a good example, what on earth is the use of
them?  They seem, as a class, to have absolutely no sense of moral
responsibility.

[Enter Lane.]

Lane.  Mr. Ernest Worthing.

[Enter Jack.]

[Lane goes out_._]

Algernon.  How are you, my dear Ernest?  What brings you up to town?

Jack.  Oh, pleasure, pleasure!  What else should bring one anywhere?
Eating as usual, I see, Algy!

Algernon.  [Stiffly_._]  I believe it is customary in good society to
take some slight refreshment at five o'clock.  Where have you been since
last Thursday?

Jack.  [Sitting down on the sofa.]  In the country.

Algernon.  What on earth do you do there?

Jack.  [Pulling off his gloves_._]  When one is in town one amuses
oneself.  When one is in the country one amuses other people.  It is
excessively boring.

Algernon.  And who are the people you amuse?

Jack.  [Airily_._]  Oh, neighbours, neighbours.

Algernon.  Got nice neighbours in your part of Shropshire?

Jack.  Perfectly horrid!  Never speak to one of them.

Algernon.  How immensely you must amuse them!  [Goes over and takes
sandwich.]  By the way, Shropshire is your county, is it not?

Jack.  Eh?  Shropshire?  Yes, of course.  Hallo!  Why all these cups?  Why
cucumber sandwiches?  Why such reckless extravagance in one so young?  Who
is coming to tea?

Algernon.  Oh! merely Aunt Augusta and Gwendolen.

Jack.  How perfectly delightful!

Algernon.  Yes, that is all very well; but I am afraid Aunt Augusta won't
quite approve of your being here.

Jack.  May I ask why?

Algernon.  My dear fellow, the way you flirt with Gwendolen is perfectly
disgraceful.  It is almost as bad as the way Gwendolen flirts with you.

Jack.  I am in love with Gwendolen.  I have come up to town expressly to
propose to her.

Algernon.  I thought you had come up for pleasure? . . . I call that
business.

Jack.  How utterly unromantic you are!

Algernon.  I really don't see anything romantic in proposing.  It is very
romantic to be in love.  But there is nothing romantic about a definite
proposal.  Why, one may be accepted.  One usually is, I believe.  Then
the excitement is all over.  The very essence of romance is uncertainty.
If ever I get married, I'll certainly try to forget the fact.

Jack.  I have no doubt about that, dear Algy.  The Divorce Court was
specially invented for people whose memories are so curiously
constituted.

Algernon.  Oh! there is no use speculating on that subject.  Divorces are
made in Heaven--[Jack puts out his hand to take a sandwich.  Algernon at
once interferes.]  Please don't touch the cucumber sandwiches.  They are
ordered specially for Aunt Augusta.  [Takes one and eats it.]

Jack.  Well, you have been eating them all the time.

Algernon.  That is quite a different matter.  She is my aunt.  [Takes
plate from below.]  Have some bread and butter.  The bread and butter is
for Gwendolen.  Gwendolen is devoted to bread and butter.

Jack.  [Advancing to table and helping himself.]  And very good bread and
butter it is too.

Algernon.  Well, my dear fellow, you need not eat as if you were going to
eat it all.  You behave as if you were married to her already.  You are
not married to her already, and I don't think you ever will be.

Jack.  Why on earth do you say that?

Algernon.  Well, in the first place girls never marry the men they flirt
with.  Girls don't think it right.

Jack.  Oh, that is nonsense!

Algernon.  It isn't.  It is a great truth.  It accounts for the
extraordinary number of bachelors that one sees all over the place.  In
the second place, I don't give my consent.

Jack.  Your consent!

Algernon.  My dear fellow, Gwendolen is my first cousin.  And before I
allow you to marry her, you will have to clear up the whole question of
Cecily.  [Rings bell.]

Jack.  Cecily!  What on earth do you mean?  What do you mean, Algy, by
Cecily!  I don't know any one of the name of Cecily.

[Enter Lane.]

Algernon.  Bring me that cigarette case Mr. Worthing left in the smoking-
room the last time he dined here.

Lane.  Yes, sir.  [Lane goes out.]

Jack.  Do you mean to say you have had my cigarette case all this time?  I
wish to goodness you had let me know.  I have been writing frantic
letters to Scotland Yard about it.  I was very nearly offering a large
reward.

Algernon.  Well, I wish you would offer one.  I happen to be more than
usually hard up.

Jack.  There is no good offering a large reward now that the thing is
found.

[Enter Lane with the cigarette case on a salver.  Algernon takes it at
once.  Lane goes out.]

Algernon.  I think that is rather mean of you, Ernest, I must say.  [Opens
case and examines it.]  However, it makes no matter, for, now that I look
at the inscription inside, I find that the thing isn't yours after all.

Jack.  Of course it's mine.  [Moving to him.]  You have seen me with it a
hundred times, and you have no right whatsoever to read what is written
inside.  It is a very ungentlemanly thing to reTheImportanceofBeingEarnestATrivialComedyforSeriousPeopleTHEPERSONSINTHEPLAYJohnWorthingJPAlgernonMoncrieffRevCanonChasubleDDMerrimanButlerLaneManservantLadyBracknellHonGwendolenFairfaxCecilyCardewMissPrismGovernessTHESCENESOFTHEPLAYACTIAlgernonMoncrieffsFlatinHalfMoonStreetWACTIITheGardenattheManorHouseWooltonACTIIIDrawingRoomattheManorHouseWooltonTIMEThePresentLONDONSTJAMESSTHEATRELesseeandManagerMrGeorgeAlexanderFebruarythJohnWorthingJPMrGeorgeAlexanderAlgernonMoncrieffMrAllenAynesworthRevCanonChasubleDDMrHHVincentMerrimanMrFrankDyallLaneMrFKinseyPeileLadyBracknellMissRoseLeclercqHonGwendolenFairfaxMissIreneVanbrughCecilyCardewMissEvelynMillardMissPrismMrsGeorgeCanningeFIRSTACTSCENEMorningroominAlgernonsflatinHalfMoonStreetTheroomisluxuriouslyandartisticallyfurnishedThesoundofapianoisheardintheadjoiningroomLaneisarrangingafternoonteaonthetableandafterthemusichasceasedAlgernonentersAlgernonDidyouhearwhatIwasplayingLaneLaneIdidntthinkitpolitetolistensirAlgernonImsorryforthatforyoursakeIdontplayaccuratelyanyonecanplayaccuratelybutIplaywithwonderfulexpressionAsfarasthepianoisconcernedsentimentismyforteIkeepscienceforLifeLaneYessirAlgernonAndspeakingofthescienceofLifehaveyougotthecucumbersandwichescutforLadyBracknellLaneYessirHandsthemonasalverAlgernonInspectsthemtakestwoandsitsdownonthesofaOhbythewayLaneIseefromyourbookthatonThursdaynightwhenLordShoremanandMrWorthingwerediningwithmeeightbottlesofchampagneareenteredashavingbeenconsumedLaneYessireightbottlesandapintAlgernonWhyisitthatatabachelorsestablishmenttheservantsinvariablydrinkthechampagneIaskmerelyforinformationLaneIattributeittothesuperiorqualityofthewinesirIhaveoftenobservedthatinmarriedhouseholdsthechampagneisrarelyofafirstratebrandAlgernonGoodheavensIsmarriagesodemoralisingasthatLaneIbelieveitisaverypleasantstatesirIhavehadverylittleexperienceofitmyselfuptothepresentIhaveonlybeenmarriedonceThatwasinconsequenceofamisunderstandingbetweenmyselfandayoungpersonAlgernonLanguidlyIdontknowthatIammuchinterestedinyourfamilylifeLaneLaneNosiritisnotaveryinterestingsubjectIneverthinkofitmyselfAlgernonVerynaturalIamsureThatwilldoLanethankyouLaneThankyousirLanegoesoutAlgernonLanesviewsonmarriageseemsomewhatlaxReallyifthelowerordersdontsetusagoodexamplewhatonearthistheuseofthemTheyseemasaclasstohaveabsolutelynosenseofmoralresponsibilityEnterLaneLaneMrErnestWorthingEnterJackLanegoesoutAlgernonHowareyoumydearErnestWhatbringsyouuptotownJackOhpleasurepleasureWhatelseshouldbringoneanywhereEatingasusualIseeAlgyAlgernonStifflyIbelieveitiscustomaryingoodsocietytotakesomeslightrefreshmentatfiveoclockWherehaveyoubeensincelastThursdayJackSittingdownonthesofaInthecountryAlgernonWhatonearthdoyoudothereJackPullingoffhisglovesWhenoneisintownoneamusesoneselfWhenoneisinthecountryoneamusesotherpeopleItisexcessivelyboringAlgernonAndwhoarethepeopleyouamuseJackAirilyOhneighboursneighboursAlgernonGotniceneighboursinyourpartofShropshireJackPerfectlyhorridNeverspeaktooneofthemAlgernonHowimmenselyyoumustamusethemGoesoverandtakessandwichBythewayShropshireisyourcountyisitnotJackEhShropshireYesofcourseHalloWhyallthesecupsWhycucumbersandwichesWhysuchrecklessextravaganceinonesoyoungWhoiscomingtoteaAlgernonOhmerelyAuntAugustaandGwendolenJackHowperfectlydelightfulAlgernonYesthatisallverywellbutIamafraidAuntAugustawontquiteapproveofyourbeinghereJackMayIaskwhyAlgernonMydearfellowthewayyouflirtwithGwendolenisperfectlydisgracefulItisalmostasbadasthewayGwendolenflirtswithyouJackIaminlovewithGwendolenIhavecomeuptotownexpresslytoproposetoherAlgernonIthoughtyouhadcomeupforpleasureIcallthatbusinessJackHowutterlyunromanticyouareAlgernonIreallydontseeanythingromanticinproposingItisveryromantictobeinloveButthereisnothingromanticaboutadefiniteproposalWhyonemaybeacceptedOneusuallyisIbelieveThentheexcitementisalloverTheveryessenceofromanceisuncertaintyIfeverIgetmarriedIllcertainlytrytoforgetthefactJackIhavenodoubtaboutthatdearAlgyTheDivorceCourtwasspeciallyinventedforpeoplewhosememoriesaresocuriouslyconstitutedAlgernonOhthereisnousespeculatingonthatsubjectDivorcesaremadeinHeavenJackputsouthishandtotakeasandwichAlgernonatI may tell you candidly that the place is not in Shropshire.

Algernon.  I suspected that, my dear fellow!  I have Bunburyed all over
Shropshire on two separate occasions.  Now, go on.  Why are you Ernest in
town and Jack in the country?

Jack.  My dear Algy, I don't know whether you will be able to understand
my real motives.  You are hardly serious enough.  When one is placed in
the position of guardian, one has to adopt a very high moral tone on all
subjects.  It's one's duty to do so.  And as a high moral tone can hardly
be said to conduce very much to either one's health or one's happiness,
in order to get up to town I have always pretended to have a younger
brother of the name of Ernest, who lives in the Albany, and gets into the
most dreadful scrapes.  That, my dear Algy, is the whole truth pure and
simple.

Algernon.  The truth is rarely pure and never simple.  Modern life would
be very tedious if it were either, and modern literature a complete
impossibility!

Jack.  That wouldn't be at all a bad thing.

Algernon.  Literary criticism is not your forte, my dear fellow.  Don't
try it.  You should leave that to people who haven't been at a
University.  They do it so well in the daily papers.  What you really are
is a Bunburyist.  I was quite right in saying you were a Bunburyist.  You
are one of the most advanced Bunburyists I know.

Jack.  What on earth do you mean?

Algernon.  You have invented a very useful younger brother called Ernest,
in order that you may be able to come up to town as often as you like.  I
have invented an invaluable permanent invalid called Bunbury, in order
that I may be able to go down into the country whenever I choose.  Bunbury
is perfectly invaluable.  If it wasn't for Bunbury's extraordinary bad
health, for instance, I wouldn't be able to dine with you at Willis's to-
night, for I have been really engaged to Aunt Augusta for more than a
week.

Jack.  I haven't asked you to dine with me anywhere to-night.

Algernon.  I know.  You are absurdly careless about sending out
invitations.  It is very foolish of you.  Nothing annoys people so much
as not receiving invitations.

Jack.  You had much better dine with your Aunt Augusta.

Algernon.  I haven't the smallest intention of doing anything of the
kind.  To begin with, I dined there on Monday, and once a week is quite
enough to dine with one's own relations.  In the second place, whenever I
do dine there I am always treated as a member of the family, and sent
down with either no woman at all, or two.  In the third place, I know
perfectly well whom she will place me next to, to-night.  She will place
me next Mary Farquhar, who always flirts with her own husband across the
dinner-table.  That is not very pleasant.  Indeed, it is not even decent
. . . and that sort of thing is enormously on the increase.  The amount
of women in London who flirt with their own husbands is perfectly
scandalous.  It looks so bad.  It is simply washing one's clean linen in
public.  Besides, now that I know you to be a confirmed Bunburyist I
naturally want to talk to you about Bunburying.  I want to tell you the
rules.

Jack.  I'm not a Bunburyist at all.  If Gwendolen accepts me, I am going
to kill my brother, indeed I think I'll kill him in any case.  Cecily is
a little too much interested in him.  It is rather a bore.  So I am going
to get rid of Ernest.  And I strongly advise you to do the same with Mr.
. . . with your invalid friend who has the absurd name.

Algernon.  Nothing will induce me to part with Bunbury, and if you ever
get married, which seems to me extremely problematic, you will be very
glad to know Bunbury.  A man who marries without knowing Bunbury has a
very tedious time of it.

Jack.  That is nonsense.  If I marry a charming girl like Gwendolen, and
she is the only girl I ever saw in my life that I would marry, I
certainly won't want to know Bunbury.

Algernon.  Then your wife will.  You don't seem to realise, that in
married life three is company and two is none.

Jack.  [Sententiously.]  That, my dear young friend, is the theory that
the corrupt French Drama has been propounding for the last fifty years.

Algernon.  Yes; and that the happy English home has proved in half the
time.

Jack.  For heaven's sake, don't try to be cynical.  It's perfectly easy
to be cynical.

Algernon.  My dear fellow, it isn't easy to be anything nowadays.  There's
such a lot of beastly competition about.  [The sound of an electric bell
is heard.]  Ah! that must be Aunt Augusta.  Only relatives, or creditors,
ever ring in that Wagnerian manner.  Now, if I get her out of the way for
ten minutes, so that you can have an opportunity for proposing to
Gwendolen, may I dine with you to-night at Willis's?

Jack.  I suppose so, if you want to.

Algernon.  Yes, but you must be serious about it.  I hate people who are
not serious about meals.  It is so shallow of them.

[Enter Lane.]

Lane.  Lady Bracknell and Miss Fairfax.

[Algernon goes forward to meet them.  Enter Lady Bracknell and
Gwendolen.]

Lady Bracknell.  Good afternoon, dear Algernon, I hope you are behaving
very well.

Algernon.  I'm feeling very well, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  That's not quite the same thing.  In fact the two things
rarely go together.  [Sees Jack and bows to him with icy coldness.]

Algernon.  [To Gwendolen.]  Dear me, you are smart!

Gwendolen.  I am always smart!  Am I not, Mr. Worthing?

Jack.  You're quite perfect, Miss Fairfax.

Gwendolen.  Oh! I hope I am not that.  It would leave no room for
developments, and I intend to develop in many directions.  [Gwendolen and
Jack sit down together in the corner.]

Lady Bracknell.  I'm sorry if we are a little late, Algernon, but I was
obliged to call on dear Lady Harbury.  I hadn't been there since her poor
husband's death.  I never saw a woman so altered; she looks quite twenty
years younger.  And now I'll have a cup of tea, and one of those nice
cucumber sandwiches you promised me.

Algernon.  Certainly, Aunt Augusta.  [Goes over to tea-table.]

Lady Bracknell.  Won't you come and sit here, Gwendolen?

Gwendolen.  Thanks, mamma, I'm quite comfortable where I am.

Algernon.  [Picking up empty plate in horror.]  Good heavens!  Lane!  Why
are there no cucumber sandwiches?  I ordered them specially.

Lane.  [Gravely.]  There were no cucumbers in the market this morning,
sir.  I went down twice.

Algernon.  No cucumbers!

Lane.  No, sir.  Not even for ready money.

Algernon.  That will do, Lane, thank you.

Lane.  Thank you, sir.  [Goes out.]

Algernon.  I am greatly distressed, Aunt Augusta, about there being no
cucumbers, not even for ready money.

Lady Bracknell.  It really makes no matter, Algernon.  I had some
crumpets with Lady Harbury, who seems to me to be living entirely for
pleasure now.

Algernon.  I hear her hair has turned quite gold from grief.

Lady Bracknell.  It certainly has changed its colour.  From what cause I,
of course, cannot say.  [Algernon crosses and hands tea.]  Thank you.
I've quite a treat for you to-night, Algernon.  I am going to send you
down with Mary Farquhar.  She is such a nice woman, and so attentive to
her husband.  It's delightful to watch them.

Algernon.  I am afraid, Aunt Augusta, I shall have to give up the
pleasure of dining with you to-night after all.

Lady Bracknell.  [Frowning.]  I hope not, Algernon.  It would put my
table completely out.  Your uncle would have to dine upstairs.
Fortunately he is accustomed to that.

Algernon.  It is a great bore, and, I need hardly say, a terrible
disappointment to me, but the fact is I have just had a telegram to say
that my poor friend Bunbury is very ill again.  [Exchanges glances with
Jack.]  They seem to think I should be with him.

Lady Bracknell.  It is very strange.  This Mr. Bunbury seems to suffer
from curiously bad health.

Algernon.  Yes; poor Bunbury is a dreadful invalid.

Lady Bracknell.  Well, I must say, Algernon, that I think it is high time
that Mr. Bunbury made up his mind whonceinterferesPleasedonttouchthecucumbersandwichesTheyareorderedspeciallyforAuntAugustaTakesoneandeatsitJackWellyouhavebeeneatingthemallthetimeAlgernonThatisquiteadifferentmatterSheismyauntTakesplatefrombelowHavesomebreadandbutterThebreadandbutterisforGwendolenGwendolenisdevotedtobreadandbutterJackAdvancingtotableandhelpinghimselfAndverygoodbreadandbutteritistooAlgernonWellmydearfellowyouneednoteatasifyouweregoingtoeatitallYoubehaveasifyouweremarriedtoheralreadyYouarenotmarriedtoheralreadyandIdontthinkyoueverwillbeJackWhyonearthdoyousaythatAlgernonWellinthefirstplacegirlsnevermarrythementheyflirtwithGirlsdontthinkitrightJackOhthatisnonsenseAlgernonItisntItisagreattruthItaccountsfortheextraordinarynumberofbachelorsthatoneseesallovertheplaceInthesecondplaceIdontgivemyconsentJackYourconsentAlgernonMydearfellowGwendolenismyfirstcousinAndbeforeIallowyoutomarryheryouwillhavetoclearupthewholequestionofCecilyRingsbellJackCecilyWhatonearthdoyoumeanWhatdoyoumeanAlgybyCecilyIdontknowanyoneofthenameofCecilyEnterLaneAlgernonBringmethatcigarettecaseMrWorthingleftinthesmokingroomthelasttimehedinedhereLaneYessirLanegoesoutJackDoyoumeantosayyouhavehadmycigarettecaseallthistimeIwishtogoodnessyouhadletmeknowIhavebeenwritingfranticletterstoScotlandYardaboutitIwasverynearlyofferingalargerewardAlgernonWellIwishyouwouldofferoneIhappentobemorethanusuallyhardupJackThereisnogoodofferingalargerewardnowthatthethingisfoundEnterLanewiththecigarettecaseonasalverAlgernontakesitatonceLanegoesoutAlgernonIthinkthatisrathermeanofyouErnestImustsayOpenscaseandexaminesitHoweveritmakesnomatterfornowthatIlookattheinscriptioninsideIfindthatthethingisntyoursafterallJackOfcourseitsmineMovingtohimYouhaveseenmewithitahundredtimesandyouhavenorightwhatsoevertoreadwhatiswritteninsideItisaveryungentlemanlythingtoreImaytellyoucandidlythattheplaceisnotinShropshireAlgernonIsuspectedthatmydearfellowIhaveBunburyedalloverShropshireontwoseparateoccasionsNowgoonWhyareyouErnestintownandJackinthecountryJackMydearAlgyIdontknowwhetheryouwillbeabletounderstandmyrealmotivesYouarehardlyseriousenoughWhenoneisplacedinthepositionofguardianonehastoadoptaveryhighmoraltoneonallsubjectsItsonesdutytodosoAndasahighmoraltonecanhardlybesaidtoconduceverymuchtoeitheroneshealthoroneshappinessinordertogetuptotownIhavealwayspretendedtohaveayoungerbrotherofthenameofErnestwholivesintheAlbanyandgetsintothemostdreadfulscrapesThatmydearAlgyisthewholetruthpureandsimpleAlgernonThetruthisrarelypureandneversimpleModernlifewouldbeverytediousifitwereeitherandmodernliteratureacompleteimpossibilityJackThatwouldntbeatallabadthingAlgernonLiterarycriticismisnotyourfortemydearfellowDonttryitYoushouldleavethattopeoplewhohaventbeenataUniversityTheydoitsowellinthedailypapersWhatyoureallyareisaBunburyistIwasquiterightinsayingyouwereaBunburyistYouareoneofthemostadvancedBunburyistsIknowJackWhatonearthdoyoumeanAlgernonYouhaveinventedaveryusefulyoungerbrothercalledErnestinorderthatyoumaybeabletocomeuptotownasoftenasyoulikeIhaveinventedaninvaluablepermanentinvalidcalledBunburyinorderthatImaybeabletogodownintothecountrywheneverIchooseBunburyisperfectlyinvaluableIfitwasntforBunburysextraordinarybadhealthforinstanceIwouldntbeabletodinewithyouatWillisstonightforIhavebeenreallyengagedtoAuntAugustaformorethanaweekJackIhaventaskedyoutodinewithmeanywheretonightAlgernonIknowYouareabsurdlycarelessaboutsendingoutinvitationsItisveryfoolishofyouNothingannoyspeoplesomuchasnotreceivinginvitationsJackYouhadmuchbetterdinewithyourAuntAugustaAlgernonIhaventthesmallestintentionofdoinganythingofthekindTobeginwithIdinedthereonMondayandonceaweekisquiteenoughtodinewithonesownrelationsInthesecondplacewheneverIdodinethereIamalwaystreatedasamemberofthefamilyandsentdownwitheithernowomanatallortwoInthethirdplaceIknowperfectlywellwhomshewillplacemenexttotonightShewillplacemenextMaryFarquharwhoalwaysflirtswithherownhusbandacrossthedinnertableThatisnotverypleasantIndeeditisnotevendecentandthatsortofthingisenormouslyontheincreaseTheamountofwomeninLondonwhoflirtwiththeirownhusbandsisperfectlyscandalousItlookssobadItissimplywashingonescleanlineninIt is a divine name.  It has a music
of its own.  It produces vibrations.

Jack.  Well, really, Gwendolen, I must say that I think there are lots of
other much nicer names.  I think Jack, for instance, a charming name.

Gwendolen.  Jack? . . . No, there is very little music in the name Jack,
if any at all, indeed.  It does not thrill.  It produces absolutely no
vibrations . . . I have known several Jacks, and they all, without
exception, were more than usually plain.  Besides, Jack is a notorious
domesticity for John!  And I pity any woman who is married to a man
called John.  She would probably never be allowed to know the entrancing
pleasure of a single moment's solitude.  The only really safe name is
Ernest.

Jack.  Gwendolen, I must get christened at once--I mean we must get
married at once.  There is no time to be lost.

Gwendolen.  Married, Mr. Worthing?

Jack.  [Astounded.]  Well . . . surely.  You know that I love you, and
you led me to believe, Miss Fairfax, that you were not absolutely
indifferent to me.

Gwendolen.  I adore you.  But you haven't proposed to me yet.  Nothing
has been said at all about marriage.  The subject has not even been
touched on.

Jack.  Well . . . may I propose to you now?

Gwendolen.  I think it would be an admirable opportunity.  And to spare
you any possible disappointment, Mr. Worthing, I think it only fair to
tell you quite frankly before-hand that I am fully determined to accept
you.

Jack.  Gwendolen!

Gwendolen.  Yes, Mr. Worthing, what have you got to say to me?

Jack.  You know what I have got to say to you.

Gwendolen.  Yes, but you don't say it.

Jack.  Gwendolen, will you marry me?  [Goes on his knees.]

Gwendolen.  Of course I will, darling.  How long you have been about it!
I am afraid you have had very little experience in how to propose.

Jack.  My own one, I have never loved any one in the world but you.

Gwendolen.  Yes, but men often propose for practice.  I know my brother
Gerald does.  All my girl-friends tell me so.  What wonderfully blue eyes
you have, Ernest!  They are quite, quite, blue.  I hope you will always
look at me just like that, especially when there are other people
present.  [Enter Lady Bracknell.]

Lady Bracknell.  Mr. Worthing!  Rise, sir, from this semi-recumbent
posture.  It is most indecorous.

Gwendolen.  Mamma!  [He tries to rise; she restrains him.]  I must beg
you to retire.  This is no place for you.  Besides, Mr. Worthing has not
quite finished yet.

Lady Bracknell.  Finished what, may I ask?

Gwendolen.  I am engaged to Mr. Worthing, mamma.  [They rise together.]

Lady Bracknell.  Pardon me, you are not engaged to any one.  When you do
become engaged to some one, I, or your father, should his health permit
him, will inform you of the fact.  An engagement should come on a young
girl as a surprise, pleasant or unpleasant, as the case may be.  It is
hardly a matter that she could be allowed to arrange for herself . . .
And now I have a few questions to put to you, Mr. Worthing.  While I am
making these inquiries, you, Gwendolen, will wait for me below in the
carriage.

Gwendolen.  [Reproachfully.]  Mamma!

Lady Bracknell.  In the carriage, Gwendolen!  [Gwendolen goes to the
door.  She and Jack blow kisses to each other behind Lady Bracknell's
back.  Lady Bracknell looks vaguely about as if she could not understand
what the noise was.  Finally turns round.]  Gwendolen, the carriage!

Gwendolen.  Yes, mamma.  [Goes out, looking back at Jack.]

Lady Bracknell.  [Sitting down.]  You can take a seat, Mr. Worthing.

[Looks in her pocket for note-book and pencil.]

Jack.  Thank you, Lady Bracknell, I prefer standing.

Lady Bracknell.  [Pencil and note-book in hand.]  I feel bound to tell
you that you are not down on my list of eligible young men, although I
have the same list as the dear Duchess of Bolton has.  We work together,
in fact.  However, I am quite ready to enter your name, should your
answers be what a really affectionate mother requires.  Do you smoke?

Jack.  Well, yes, I must admit I smoke.

Lady Bracknell.  I am glad to hear it.  A man should always have an
occupation of some kind.  There are far too many idle men in London as it
is.  How old are you?

Jack.  Twenty-nine.

Lady Bracknell.  A very good age to be married at.  I have always been of
opinion that a man who desires to get married should know either
everything or nothing.  Which do you know?

Jack.  [After some hesitation.]  I know nothing, Lady Bracknell.

Lady Bracknell.  I am pleased to hear it.  I do not approve of anything
that tampers with natural ignorance.  Ignorance is like a delicate exotic
fruit; touch it and the bloom is gone.  The whole theory of modern
education is radically unsound.  Fortunately in England, at any rate,
education produces no effect whatsoever.  If it did, it would prove a
serious danger to the upper classes, and probably lead to acts of
violence in Grosvenor Square.  What is your income?

Jack.  Between seven and eight thousand a year.

Lady Bracknell.  [Makes a note in her book.]  In land, or in investments?

Jack.  In investments, chiefly.

Lady Bracknell.  That is satisfactory.  What between the duties expected
of one during one's lifetime, and the duties exacted from one after one's
death, land has ceased to be either a profit or a pleasure.  It gives one
position, and prevents one from keeping it up.  That's all that can be
said about land.

Jack.  I have a country house with some land, of course, attached to it,
about fifteen hundred acres, I believe; but I don't depend on that for my
real income.  In fact, as far as I can make out, the poachers are the
only people who make anything out of it.

Lady Bracknell.  A country house!  How many bedrooms?  Well, that point
can be cleared up afterwards.  You have a town house, I hope?  A girl
with a simple, unspoiled nature, like Gwendolen, could hardly be expected
to reside in the country.

Jack.  Well, I own a house in Belgrave Square, but it is let by the year
to Lady Bloxham.  Of course, I can get it back whenever I like, at six
months' notice.

Lady Bracknell.  Lady Bloxham?  I don't know her.

Jack.  Oh, she goes about very little.  She is a lady considerably
advanced in years.

Lady Bracknell.  Ah, nowadays that is no guarantee of respectability of
character.  What number in Belgrave Square?

Jack.  149.

Lady Bracknell.  [Shaking her head.]  The unfashionable side.  I thought
there was something.  However, that could easily be altered.

Jack.  Do you mean the fashion, or the side?

Lady Bracknell.  [Sternly.]  Both, if necessary, I presume.  What are
your politics?

Jack.  Well, I am afraid I really have none.  I am a Liberal Unionist.

Lady Bracknell.  Oh, they count as Tories.  They dine with us.  Or come
in the evening, at any rate.  Now to minor matters.  Are your parents
living?

Jack.  I have lost both my parents.

Lady Bracknell.  To lose one parent, Mr. Worthing, may be regarded as a
misfortune; to lose both looks like carelessness.  Who was your father?
He was evidently a man of some wealth.  Was he born in what the Radical
papers call the purple of commerce, or did he rise from the ranks of the
aristocracy?

Jack.  I am afraid I really don't know.  The fact is, Lady Bracknell, I
said I had lost my parents.  It would be nearer the truth to say that my
parents seem to have lost me . . . I don't actually know who I am by
birth.  I was . . . well, I was found.

Lady Bracknell.  Found!

Jack.  The late Mr. Thomas Cardew, an old gentleman of a very charitable
and kindly disposition, found me, and gave me the name of Worthing,
because he happened to have a first-class ticket for Worthing in his
pocket at the time.  Worthing is a place in Sussex.  It is a seaside
resort.

Lady Bracknell.  Where did the charitable gentleman who had a first-class
ticket for this seaside resort find you?

Jack.  [Gravely.]  In a hand-bag.

Lady Bracknell.  A hand-bag?

Jack.  [Very seriously.]  Yes, Lady Bracknell.  I was in a publicBesidesnowthatIknowyoutobeaconfirmedBunburyistInaturallywanttotalktoyouaboutBunburyingIwanttotellyoutherulesJackImnotaBunburyistatallIfGwendolenacceptsmeIamgoingtokillmybrotherindeedIthinkIllkillhiminanycaseCecilyisalittletoomuchinterestedinhimItisratheraboreSoIamgoingtogetridofErnestAndIstronglyadviseyoutodothesamewithMrwithyourinvalidfriendwhohastheabsurdnameAlgernonNothingwillinducemetopartwithBunburyandifyouevergetmarriedwhichseemstomeextremelyproblematicyouwillbeverygladtoknowBunburyAmanwhomarrieswithoutknowingBunburyhasaverytedioustimeofitJackThatisnonsenseIfImarryacharminggirllikeGwendolenandsheistheonlygirlIeversawinmylifethatIwouldmarryIcertainlywontwanttoknowBunburyAlgernonThenyourwifewillYoudontseemtorealisethatinmarriedlifethreeiscompanyandtwoisnoneJackSententiouslyThatmydearyoungfriendisthetheorythatthecorruptFrenchDramahasbeenpropoundingforthelastfiftyyearsAlgernonYesandthatthehappyEnglishhomehasprovedinhalfthetimeJackForheavenssakedonttrytobecynicalItsperfectlyeasytobecynicalAlgernonMydearfellowitisnteasytobeanythingnowadaysTheressuchalotofbeastlycompetitionaboutThesoundofanelectricbellisheardAhthatmustbeAuntAugustaOnlyrelativesorcreditorseverringinthatWagnerianmannerNowifIgetheroutofthewayfortenminutessothatyoucanhaveanopportunityforproposingtoGwendolenmayIdinewithyoutonightatWillissJackIsupposesoifyouwanttoAlgernonYesbutyoumustbeseriousaboutitIhatepeoplewhoarenotseriousaboutmealsItissoshallowofthemEnterLaneLaneLadyBracknellandMissFairfaxAlgernongoesforwardtomeetthemEnterLadyBracknellandGwendolenLadyBracknellGoodafternoondearAlgernonIhopeyouarebehavingverywellAlgernonImfeelingverywellAuntAugustaLadyBracknellThatsnotquitethesamethingInfactthetwothingsrarelygotogetherSeesJackandbowstohimwithicycoldnessAlgernonToGwendolenDearmeyouaresmartGwendolenIamalwayssmartAmInotMrWorthingJackYourequiteperfectMissFairfaxGwendolenOhIhopeIamnotthatItwouldleavenoroomfordevelopmentsandIintendtodevelopinmanydirectionsGwendolenandJacksitdowntogetherinthecornerLadyBracknellImsorryifwearealittlelateAlgernonbutIwasobligedtocallondearLadyHarburyIhadntbeentheresinceherpoorhusbandsdeathIneversawawomansoalteredshelooksquitetwentyyearsyoungerAndnowIllhaveacupofteaandoneofthosenicecucumbersandwichesyoupromisedmeAlgernonCertainlyAuntAugustaGoesovertoteatableLadyBracknellWontyoucomeandsithereGwendolenGwendolenThanksmammaImquitecomfortablewhereIamAlgernonPickingupemptyplateinhorrorGoodheavensLaneWhyaretherenocucumbersandwichesIorderedthemspeciallyLaneGravelyTherewerenocucumbersinthemarketthismorningsirIwentdowntwiceAlgernonNocucumbersLaneNosirNotevenforreadymoneyAlgernonThatwilldoLanethankyouLaneThankyousirGoesoutAlgernonIamgreatlydistressedAuntAugustaabouttherebeingnocucumbersnotevenforreadymoneyLadyBracknellItreallymakesnomatterAlgernonIhadsomecrumpetswithLadyHarburywhoseemstometobelivingentirelyforpleasurenowAlgernonIhearherhairhasturnedquitegoldfromgriefLadyBracknellItcertainlyhaschangeditscolourFromwhatcauseIofcoursecannotsayAlgernoncrossesandhandsteaThankyouIvequiteatreatforyoutonightAlgernonIamgoingtosendyoudownwithMaryFarquharSheissuchanicewomanandsoattentivetoherhusbandItsdelightfultowatchthemAlgernonIamafraidAuntAugustaIshallhavetogiveupthepleasureofdiningwithyoutonightafterallLadyBracknellFrowningIhopenotAlgernonItwouldputmytablecompletelyoutYourunclewouldhavetodineupstairsFortunatelyheisaccustomedtothatAlgernonItisagreatboreandIneedhardlysayaterribledisappointmenttomebutthefactisIhavejusthadatelegramtosaythatmypoorfriendBunburyisveryillagainExchangesglanceswithJackTheyseemtothinkIshouldbewithhimLadyBracknellItisverystrangeThisMrBunburyseemstosufferfromcuriouslybadhealthAlgernonYespoorBunburyisadreadfulinvalidLadyBracknellWellImustsayAlgernonthatIthinkitishightimethatMrBunburymadeuphismindwhItisadivinenameIthasamusicofitsownItproducesvibrationsJackWellreallyGwendolenImustsaythatIthinktherearelotsofothermuchnicernamesIthinkJackforinstanceacharmingnameGwendolenJackNothereisverylittlemusicinthenameJackifanyatallindeedItdoesnotthrillItproducesabsolutelynovibrationsIhaveknownseveralJacksandtheyallwithoutexceptionweremorethanusuallyplainBesidesJackisanotoriousdomesticityforJohnAndIpityanywomanwhoismarriedtoamancalledJohnShewouldprobablyneverbeallowedtoknowtheentrancingpleasureofasinglemomentssolitudeTheonlyreallysafenameisErnestJackGwendolenImustgetchristenedatonceImeanwemustgetmarriedatonceThereisnotimetobelostGwendolenMarriedMrWorthingJackAstoundedWellsurelyYouknowthatIloveyouandyouledmetobelieveMissFairfaxthatyouwerenotabsolutelyindifferenttomeGwendolenIadoreyouButyouhaventproposedtomeyetNothinghasbeensaidatallaboutmarriageThesubjecthasnotevenbeentouchedonJackWellmayIproposetoyounowGwendolenIthinkitwouldbeanadmirableopportunityAndtospareyouanypossibledisappointmentMrWorthingIthinkitonlyfairtotellyouquitefranklybeforehandthatIamfullydeterminedtoacceptyouJackGwendolenGwendolenYesMrWorthingwhathaveyougottosaytomeJackYouknowwhatIhavegottosaytoyouGwendolenYesbutyoudontsayitJackGwendolenwillyoumarrymeGoesonhiskneesGwendolenOfcourseIwilldarlingHowlongyouhavebeenaboutitIamafraidyouhavehadverylittleexperienceinhowtoproposeJackMyownoneIhaveneverlovedanyoneintheworldbutyouGwendolenYesbutmenoftenproposeforpracticeIknowmybrotherGeralddoesAllmygirlfriendstellmesoWhatwonderfullyblueeyesyouhaveErnestTheyarequitequiteblueIhopeyouwillalwayslookatmejustlikethatespeciallywhenthereareotherpeoplepresentEnterLadyBracknellLadyBracknellMrWorthingRisesirfromthissemirecumbentpostureItismostindecorousGwendolenMammaHetriestorisesherestrainshimImustbegyoutoretireThisisnoplaceforyouBesidesMrWorthinghasnotquitefinishedyetLadyBracknellFinishedwhatmayIaskGwendolenIamengagedtoMrWorthingmammaTheyrisetogetherLadyBracknellPardonmeyouarenotengagedtoanyoneWhenyoudobecomeengagedtosomeoneIoryourfathershouldhishealthpermithimwillinformyouofthefactAnengagementshouldcomeonayounggirlasasurprisepleasantorunpleasantasthecasemaybeItishardlyamatterthatshecouldbeallowedtoarrangeforherselfAndnowIhaveafewquestionstoputtoyouMrWorthingWhileIammakingtheseinquiriesyouGwendolenwillwaitformebelowinthecarriageGwendolenReproachfullyMammaLadyBracknellInthecarriageGwendolenGwendolengoestothedoorSheandJackblowkissestoeachotherbehindLadyBracknellsbackLadyBracknelllooksvaguelyaboutasifshecouldnotunderstandwhatthenoisewasFinallyturnsroundGwendolenthecarriageGwendolenYesmammaGoesoutlookingbackatJackLadyBracknellSittingdownYoucantakeaseatMrWorthingLooksinherpocketfornotebookandpencilJackThankyouLadyBracknellIpreferstandingLadyBracknellPencilandnotebookinhandIfeelboundtotellyouthatyouarenotdownonmylistofeligibleyoungmenalthoughIhavethesamelistasthedearDuchessofBoltonhasWeworktogetherinfactHoweverIamquitereadytoenteryournameshouldyouranswersbewhatareallyaffectionatemotherrequiresDoyousmokeJackWellyesImustadmitIsmokeLadyBracknellIamgladtohearitAmanshouldalwayshaveanoccupationofsomekindTherearefartoomanyidlemeninLondonasitisHowoldareyouJackTwentynineLadyBracknellAverygoodagetobemarriedatIhavealwaysbeenofopinionthatamanwhodesirestogetmarriedshouldknoweithereverythingornothingWhichdoyouknowJackAftersomehesitationIknownothingLadyBracknellLadyBracknellIampleasedtohearitIdonotapproveofanythingthattamperswithnaturalignoranceIgnoranceislikeadelicateexoticfruittouchitandthebloomisgoneThewholetheoryofmoderneducationisradicallyunsoundFortunatelyinEnglandatanyrateeducationproducesnoeffectwhatsoeverIfitdiditwouldproveaseriousdangertotheupperclassesandprobablyleadtoactsofviolenceinGrosvenorSquareWhatisyourincomeJackBetweensevenandeightthousandayearLadyBracknellMakesanoteinherbookInlandorininvestmentsJackIninvestmentschieflyLadyBracknellThatissatisfactoryWhatbetweenthedutiesexpectedofoneduringoneslifetimeandthedutiesexactedfromoneafteronesdeathlandhasceasedtobeeitheraprofitorapleasureItgivesonepositionandpreventsonefromkeepingitupThatsallthatcanbesaidaboutlandJackIhaveacountryhousewithsomelandofcourseattachedtoitaboutfifteenhundredacresIbelievebutIdontdependonthatformyrealincomeInfactasfarasIcanmakeoutthepoachersaretheonlypeoplewhomakeanythingoutofitLadyBracknellAcountryhouseHowmanybedroomsWellthatpointcanbeclearedupafterwardsYouhaveatownhouseIhopeAgirll devotion to you.

Jack.  Dear Gwendolen!

Gwendolen.  The story of your romantic origin, as related to me by mamma,
with unpleasing comments, has naturally stirred the deeper fibres of my
nature.  Your Christian name has an irresistible fascination.  The
simplicity of your character makes you exquisitely incomprehensible to
me.  Your town address at the Albany I have.  What is your address in the
country?

Jack.  The Manor House, Woolton, Hertfordshire.

[Algernon, who has been carefully listening, smiles to himself, and
writes the address on his shirt-cuff.  Then picks up the Railway Guide.]

Gwendolen.  There is a good postal service, I suppose?  It may be
necessary to do something desperate.  That of course will require serious
consideration.  I will communicate with you daily.

Jack.  My own one!

Gwendolen.  How long do you remain in town?

Jack.  Till Monday.

Gwendolen.  Good!  Algy, you may turn round now.

Algernon.  Thanks, I've turned round already.

Gwendolen.  You may also ring the bell.

Jack.  You will let me see you to your carriage, my own darling?

Gwendolen.  Certainly.

Jack.  [To Lane, who now enters.]  I will see Miss Fairfax out.

Lane.  Yes, sir.  [Jack and Gwendolen go off.]

[Lane presents several letters on a salver to Algernon.  It is to be
surmised that they are bills, as Algernon, after looking at the
envelopes, tears them up.]

Algernon.  A glass of sherry, Lane.

Lane.  Yes, sir.

Algernon.  To-morrow, Lane, I'm going Bunburying.

Lane.  Yes, sir.

Algernon.  I shall probably not be back till Monday.  You can put up my
dress clothes, my smoking jacket, and all the Bunbury suits . . .

Lane.  Yes, sir.  [Handing sherry.]

Algernon.  I hope to-morrow will be a fine day, Lane.

Lane.  It never is, sir.

Algernon.  Lane, you're a perfect pessimist.

Lane.  I do my best to give satisfaction, sir.

[Enter Jack.  Lane goes off.]

Jack.  There's a sensible, intellectual girl! the only girl I ever cared
for in my life.  [Algernon is laughing immoderately.]  What on earth are
you so amused at?

Algernon.  Oh, I'm a little anxious about poor Bunbury, that is all.

Jack.  If you don't take care, your friend Bunbury will get you into a
serious scrape some day.

Algernon.  I love scrapes.  They are the only things that are never
serious.

Jack.  Oh, that's nonsense, Algy.  You never talk anything but nonsense.

Algernon.  Nobody ever does.

[Jack looks indignantly at him, and leaves the room.  Algernon lights a
cigarette, reads his shirt-cuff, and smiles.]

ACT DROP




SECOND ACT


SCENE


Garden at the Manor House.  A flight of grey stone steps leads up to the
house.  The garden, an old-fashioned one, full of roses.  Time of year,
July.  Basket chairs, and a table covered with books, are set under a
large yew-tree.

[Miss Prism discovered seated at the table.  Cecily is at the back
watering flowers.]

Miss Prism.  [Calling.]  Cecily, Cecily!  Surely such a utilitarian
occupation as the watering of flowers is rather Moulton's duty than
yours?  Especially at a moment when intellectual pleasures await you.
Your German grammar is on the table.  Pray open it at page fifteen.  We
will repeat yesterday's lesson.

Cecily.  [Coming over very slowly.]  But I don't like German.  It isn't
at all a becoming language.  I know perfectly well that I look quite
plain after my German lesson.

Miss Prism.  Child, you know how anxious your guardian is that you should
improve yourself in every way.  He laid particular stress on your German,
as he was leaving for town yesterday.  Indeed, he always lays stress on
your German when he is leaving for town.

Cecily.  Dear Uncle Jack is so very serious!  Sometimes he is so serious
that I think he cannot be quite well.

Miss Prism.  [Drawing herself up.]  Your guardian enjoys the best of
health, and his gravity of demeanour is especially to be commended in one
so comparatively young as he is.  I know no one who has a higher sense of
duty and responsibility.

Cecily.  I suppose that is why he often looks a little bored when we
three are together.

Miss Prism.  Cecily!  I am surprised at you.  Mr. Worthing has many
troubles in his life.  Idle merriment and triviality would be out of
place in his conversation.  You must remember his constant anxiety about
that unfortunate young man his brother.

Cecily.  I wish Uncle Jack would allow that unfortunate young man, his
brother, to come down here sometimes.  We might have a good influence
over him, Miss Prism.  I am sure you certainly would.  You know German,
and geology, and things of that kind influence a man very much.  [Cecily
begins to write in her diary.]

Miss Prism.  [Shaking her head.]  I do not think that even I could
produce any effect on a character that according to his own brother's
admission is irretrievably weak and vacillating.  Indeed I am not sure
that I would desire to reclaim him.  I am not in favour of this modern
mania for turning bad people into good people at a moment's notice.  As a
man sows so let him reap.  You must put away your diary, Cecily.  I
really don't see why you should keep a diary at all.

Cecily.  I keep a diary in order to enter the wonderful secrets of my
life.  If I didn't write them down, I should probably forget all about
them.

Miss Prism.  Memory, my dear Cecily, is the diary that we all carry about
with us.

Cecily.  Yes, but it usually chronicles the things that have never
happened, and couldn't possibly have happened.  I believe that Memory is
responsible for nearly all the three-volume novels that Mudie sends us.

Miss Prism.  Do not speak slightingly of the three-volume novel, Cecily.
I wrote one myself in earlier days.

Cecily.  Did you really, Miss Prism?  How wonderfully clever you are!  I
hope it did not end happily?  I don't like novels that end happily.  They
depress me so much.

Miss Prism.  The good ended happily, and the bad unhappily.  That is what
Fiction means.

Cecily.  I suppose so.  But it seems very unfair.  And was your novel
ever published?

Miss Prism.  Alas! no.  The manuscript unfortunately was abandoned.
[Cecily starts.]  I use the word in the sense of lost or mislaid.  To
your work, child, these speculations are profitless.

Cecily.  [Smiling.]  But I see dear Dr. Chasuble coming up through the
garden.

Miss Prism.  [Rising and advancing.]  Dr. Chasuble!  This is indeed a
pleasure.

[Enter Canon Chasuble.]

Chasuble.  And how are we this morning?  Miss Prism, you are, I trust,
well?

Cecily.  Miss Prism has just been complaining of a slight headache.  I
think it would do her so much good to have a short stroll with you in the
Park, Dr. Chasuble.

Miss Prism.  Cecily, I have not mentioned anything about a headache.

Cecily.  No, dear Miss Prism, I know that, but I felt instinctively that
you had a headache.  Indeed I was thinking about that, and not about my
German lesson, when the Rector came in.

Chasuble.  I hope, Cecily, you are not inattentive.

Cecily.  Oh, I am afraid I am.

Chasuble.  That is strange.  Were I fortunate enough to be Miss Prism's
pupil, I would hang upon her lips.  [Miss Prism glares.]  I spoke
metaphorically.--My metaphor was drawn from bees.  Ahem!  Mr. Worthing, I
suppose, has not returned from town yet?

Miss Prism.  We do not expect him till Monday afternoon.

Chasuble.  Ah yes, he usually likes to spend his Sunday in London.  He is
not one of those whose sole aim is enjoyment, as, by all accounts, that
unfortunate young man his brother seems to be.  But I must not disturb
Egeria and her pupil any longer.

Miss Prism.  Egeria?  My name is Laetitia, Doctor.

Chasuble.  [Bowing.]  A classical allusion merely, drawn from the Pagan
authors.  I shall see you both no doubt at Evensong?

Miss Prism.  I think, dear Doctor, I will have a stroll with you.  I find
I have a headache after all, and a walk might do it good.

Chasuble.  With pleasure, Miss Prism, with pleasure.  We might go as far
as the schools and back.

Miss Prism.  That wouwithasimpleunspoilednaturelikeGwendolencouldhardlybeexpectedtoresideinthecountryJackWellIownahouseinBelgraveSquarebutitisletbytheyeartoLadyBloxhamOfcourseIcangetitbackwheneverIlikeatsixmonthsnoticeLadyBracknellLadyBloxhamIdontknowherJackOhshegoesaboutverylittleSheisaladyconsiderablyadvancedinyearsLadyBracknellAhnowadaysthatisnoguaranteeofrespectabilityofcharacterWhatnumberinBelgraveSquareJackLadyBracknellShakingherheadTheunfashionablesideIthoughttherewassomethingHoweverthatcouldeasilybealteredJackDoyoumeanthefashionorthesideLadyBracknellSternlyBothifnecessaryIpresumeWhatareyourpoliticsJackWellIamafraidIreallyhavenoneIamaLiberalUnionistLadyBracknellOhtheycountasToriesTheydinewithusOrcomeintheeveningatanyrateNowtominormattersAreyourparentslivingJackIhavelostbothmyparentsLadyBracknellToloseoneparentMrWorthingmayberegardedasamisfortunetolosebothlookslikecarelessnessWhowasyourfatherHewasevidentlyamanofsomewealthWasheborninwhattheRadicalpaperscallthepurpleofcommerceordidherisefromtheranksofthearistocracyJackIamafraidIreallydontknowThefactisLadyBracknellIsaidIhadlostmyparentsItwouldbenearerthetruthtosaythatmyparentsseemtohavelostmeIdontactuallyknowwhoIambybirthIwaswellIwasfoundLadyBracknellFoundJackThelateMrThomasCardewanoldgentlemanofaverycharitableandkindlydispositionfoundmeandgavemethenameofWorthingbecausehehappenedtohaveafirstclassticketforWorthinginhispocketatthetimeWorthingisaplaceinSussexItisaseasideresortLadyBracknellWheredidthecharitablegentlemanwhohadafirstclassticketforthisseasideresortfindyouJackGravelyInahandbagLadyBracknellAhandbagJackVeryseriouslyYesLadyBracknellIwasinaldevotiontoyouJackDearGwendolenGwendolenThestoryofyourromanticoriginasrelatedtomebymammawithunpleasingcommentshasnaturallystirredthedeeperfibresofmynatureYourChristiannamehasanirresistiblefascinationThesimplicityofyourcharactermakesyouexquisitelyincomprehensibletomeYourtownaddressattheAlbanyIhaveWhatisyouraddressinthecountryJackTheManorHouseWooltonHertfordshireAlgernonwhohasbeencarefullylisteningsmilestohimselfandwritestheaddressonhisshirtcuffThenpicksuptheRailwayGuideGwendolenThereisagoodpostalserviceIsupposeItmaybenecessarytodosomethingdesperateThatofcoursewillrequireseriousconsiderationIwillcommunicatewithyoudailyJackMyownoneGwendolenHowlongdoyouremainintownJackTillMondayGwendolenGoodAlgyyoumayturnroundnowAlgernonThanksIveturnedroundalreadyGwendolenYoumayalsoringthebellJackYouwillletmeseeyoutoyourcarriagemyowndarlingGwendolenCertainlyJackToLanewhonowentersIwillseeMissFairfaxoutLaneYessirJackandGwendolengooffLanepresentsseverallettersonasalvertoAlgernonItistobesurmisedthattheyarebillsasAlgernonafterlookingattheenvelopestearsthemupAlgernonAglassofsherryLaneLaneYessirAlgernonTomorrowLaneImgoingBunburyingLaneYessirAlgernonIshallprobablynotbebacktillMondayYoucanputupmydressclothesmysmokingjacketandalltheBunburysuitsLaneYessirHandingsherryAlgernonIhopetomorrowwillbeafinedayLaneLaneItneverissirAlgernonLaneyoureaperfectpessimistLaneIdomybesttogivesatisfactionsirEnterJackLanegoesoffJackTheresasensibleintellectualgirltheonlygirlIevercaredforinmylifeAlgernonislaughingimmoderatelyWhatonearthareyousoamusedatAlgernonOhImalittleanxiousaboutpoorBunburythatisallJackIfyoudonttakecareyourfriendBunburywillgetyouintoaseriousscrapesomedayAlgernonIlovescrapesTheyaretheonlythingsthatareneverseriousJackOhthatsnonsenseAlgyYounevertalkanythingbutnonsenseAlgernonNobodyeverdoesJacklooksindignantlyathimandleavestheroomAlgernonlightsacigarettereadshisshirtcuffandsmilesACTDROPSECONDACTSCENEGardenattheManorHouseAflightofgreystonestepsleadsuptothehouseThegardenanoldfashionedonefullofrosesTimeofyearJulyBasketchairsandatablecoveredwithbooksaresetunderalargeyewtreeMissPrismdiscoveredseatedatthetableCecilyisatthebackwateringflowersMissPrismCallingCecilyCecilySurelysuchautilitarianoccupationasthewateringofflowersisratherMoultonsdutythanyoursEspeciallyatamomentwhenintellectualpleasuresawaityouYourGermangrammarisonthetablePrayopenitatpagefifteenWewillrepeatyesterdayslessonCecilyComingoververyslowlyButIdontlikeGermanItisntatallabecominglanguageIknowperfectlywellthatIlookquiteer already.

Cecily.  You are looking a little worse.

Algernon.  That is because I am hungry.

Cecily.  How thoughtless of me.  I should have remembered that when one
is going to lead an entirely new life, one requires regular and wholesome
meals.  Won't you come in?

Algernon.  Thank you.  Might I have a buttonhole first?  I never have any
appetite unless I have a buttonhole first.

Cecily.  A Marechal Niel?  [Picks up scissors.]

Algernon.  No, I'd sooner have a pink rose.

Cecily.  Why?  [Cuts a flower.]

Algernon.  Because you are like a pink rose, Cousin Cecily.

Cecily.  I don't think it can be right for you to talk to me like that.
Miss Prism never says such things to me.

Algernon.  Then Miss Prism is a short-sighted old lady.  [Cecily puts the
rose in his buttonhole.]  You are the prettiest girl I ever saw.

Cecily.  Miss Prism says that all good looks are a snare.

Algernon.  They are a snare that every sensible man would like to be
caught in.

Cecily.  Oh, I don't think I would care to catch a sensible man.  I
shouldn't know what to talk to him about.

[They pass into the house.  Miss Prism and Dr. Chasuble return.]

Miss Prism.  You are too much alone, dear Dr. Chasuble.  You should get
married.  A misanthrope I can understand--a womanthrope, never!

Chasuble.  [With a scholar's shudder.]  Believe me, I do not deserve so
neologistic a phrase.  The precept as well as the practice of the
Primitive Church was distinctly against matrimony.

Miss Prism.  [Sententiously.]  That is obviously the reason why the
Primitive Church has not lasted up to the present day.  And you do not
seem to realise, dear Doctor, that by persistently remaining single, a
man converts himself into a permanent public temptation.  Men should be
more careful; this very celibacy leads weaker vessels astray.

Chasuble.  But is a man not equally attractive when married?

Miss Prism.  No married man is ever attractive except to his wife.

Chasuble.  And often, I've been told, not even to her.

Miss Prism.  That depends on the intellectual sympathies of the woman.
Maturity can always be depended on.  Ripeness can be trusted.  Young
women are green.  [Dr. Chasuble starts.]  I spoke horticulturally.  My
metaphor was drawn from fruits.  But where is Cecily?

Chasuble.  Perhaps she followed us to the schools.

[Enter Jack slowly from the back of the garden.  He is dressed in the
deepest mourning, with crape hatband and black gloves.]

Miss Prism.  Mr. Worthing!

Chasuble.  Mr. Worthing?

Miss Prism.  This is indeed a surprise.  We did not look for you till
Monday afternoon.

Jack.  [Shakes Miss Prism's hand in a tragic manner.]  I have returned
sooner than I expected.  Dr. Chasuble, I hope you are well?

Chasuble.  Dear Mr. Worthing, I trust this garb of woe does not betoken
some terrible calamity?

Jack.  My brother.

Miss Prism.  More shameful debts and extravagance?

Chasuble.  Still leading his life of pleasure?

Jack.  [Shaking his head.]  Dead!

Chasuble.  Your brother Ernest dead?

Jack.  Quite dead.

Miss Prism.  What a lesson for him!  I trust he will profit by it.

Chasuble.  Mr. Worthing, I offer you my sincere condolence.  You have at
least the consolation of knowing that you were always the most generous
and forgiving of brothers.

Jack.  Poor Ernest!  He had many faults, but it is a sad, sad blow.

Chasuble.  Very sad indeed.  Were you with him at the end?

Jack.  No.  He died abroad; in Paris, in fact.  I had a telegram last
night from the manager of the Grand Hotel.

Chasuble.  Was the cause of death mentioned?

Jack.  A severe chill, it seems.

Miss Prism.  As a man sows, so shall he reap.

Chasuble.  [Raising his hand.]  Charity, dear Miss Prism, charity!  None
of us are perfect.  I myself am peculiarly susceptible to draughts.  Will
the interment take place here?

Jack.  No.  He seems to have expressed a desire to be buried in Paris.

Chasuble.  In Paris!  [Shakes his head.]  I fear that hardly points to
any very serious state of mind at the last.  You would no doubt wish me
to make some slight allusion to this tragic domestic affliction next
Sunday.  [Jack presses his hand convulsively.]  My sermon on the meaning
of the manna in the wilderness can be adapted to almost any occasion,
joyful, or, as in the present case, distressing.  [All sigh.]  I have
preached it at harvest celebrations, christenings, confirmations, on days
of humiliation and festal days.  The last time I delivered it was in the
Cathedral, as a charity sermon on behalf of the Society for the
Prevention of Discontent among the Upper Orders.  The Bishop, who was
present, was much struck by some of the analogies I drew.

Jack.  Ah! that reminds me, you mentioned christenings I think, Dr.
Chasuble?  I suppose you know how to christen all right?  [Dr. Chasuble
looks astounded.]  I mean, of course, you are continually christening,
aren't you?

Miss Prism.  It is, I regret to say, one of the Rector's most constant
duties in this parish.  I have often spoken to the poorer classes on the
subject.  But they don't seem to know what thrift is.

Chasuble.  But is there any particular infant in whom you are interested,
Mr. Worthing?  Your brother was, I believe, unmarried, was he not?

Jack.  Oh yes.

Miss Prism.  [Bitterly.]  People who live entirely for pleasure usually
are.

Jack.  But it is not for any child, dear Doctor.  I am very fond of
children.  No! the fact is, I would like to be christened myself, this
afternoon, if you have nothing better to do.

Chasuble.  But surely, Mr. Worthing, you have been christened already?

Jack.  I don't remember anything about it.

Chasuble.  But have you any grave doubts on the subject?

Jack.  I certainly intend to have.  Of course I don't know if the thing
would bother you in any way, or if you think I am a little too old now.

Chasuble.  Not at all.  The sprinkling, and, indeed, the immersion of
adults is a perfectly canonical practice.

Jack.  Immersion!

Chasuble.  You need have no apprehensions.  Sprinkling is all that is
necessary, or indeed I think advisable.  Our weather is so changeable.  At
what hour would you wish the ceremony performed?

Jack.  Oh, I might trot round about five if that would suit you.

Chasuble.  Perfectly, perfectly!  In fact I have two similar ceremonies
to perform at that time.  A case of twins that occurred recently in one
of the outlying cottages on your own estate.  Poor Jenkins the carter, a
most hard-working man.

Jack.  Oh!  I don't see much fun in being christened along with other
babies.  It would be childish.  Would half-past five do?

Chasuble.  Admirably!  Admirably!  [Takes out watch.]  And now, dear Mr.
Worthing, I will not intrude any longer into a house of sorrow.  I would
merely beg you not to be too much bowed down by grief.  What seem to us
bitter trials are often blessings in disguise.

Miss Prism.  This seems to me a blessing of an extremely obvious kind.

[Enter Cecily from the house.]

Cecily.  Uncle Jack!  Oh, I am pleased to see you back.  But what horrid
clothes you have got on!  Do go and change them.

Miss Prism.  Cecily!

Chasuble.  My child! my child!  [Cecily goes towards Jack; he kisses her
brow in a melancholy manner.]

Cecily.  What is the matter, Uncle Jack?  Do look happy!  You look as if
you had toothache, and I have got such a surprise for you.  Who do you
think is in the dining-room?  Your brother!

Jack.  Who?

Cecily.  Your brother Ernest.  He arrived about half an hour ago.

Jack.  What nonsense!  I haven't got a brother.

Cecily.  Oh, don't say that.  However badly he may have behaved to you in
the past he is still your brother.  You couldn't be so heartless as to
disown him.  I'll tell him to come out.  And you will shake hands with
him, won't you, Uncle Jack?  [Runs back into the house.]

Chasuble.  These are very joyful tidings.

Miss Prism.  After we had all been resigned to his loss, his sudden
return seems to me peculiarly distressing.

Jack.  My brother is in tplainaftermyGermanlessonMissPrismChildyouknowhowanxiousyourguardianisthatyoushouldimproveyourselfineverywayHelaidparticularstressonyourGermanashewasleavingfortownyesterdayIndeedhealwayslaysstressonyourGermanwhenheisleavingfortownCecilyDearUncleJackissoveryseriousSometimesheissoseriousthatIthinkhecannotbequitewellMissPrismDrawingherselfupYourguardianenjoysthebestofhealthandhisgravityofdemeanourisespeciallytobecommendedinonesocomparativelyyoungasheisIknownoonewhohasahighersenseofdutyandresponsibilityCecilyIsupposethatiswhyheoftenlooksalittleboredwhenwethreearetogetherMissPrismCecilyIamsurprisedatyouMrWorthinghasmanytroublesinhislifeIdlemerrimentandtrivialitywouldbeoutofplaceinhisconversationYoumustrememberhisconstantanxietyaboutthatunfortunateyoungmanhisbrotherCecilyIwishUncleJackwouldallowthatunfortunateyoungmanhisbrothertocomedownheresometimesWemighthaveagoodinfluenceoverhimMissPrismIamsureyoucertainlywouldYouknowGermanandgeologyandthingsofthatkindinfluenceamanverymuchCecilybeginstowriteinherdiaryMissPrismShakingherheadIdonotthinkthatevenIcouldproduceanyeffectonacharacterthataccordingtohisownbrothersadmissionisirretrievablyweakandvacillatingIndeedIamnotsurethatIwoulddesiretoreclaimhimIamnotinfavourofthismodernmaniaforturningbadpeopleintogoodpeopleatamomentsnoticeAsamansowssolethimreapYoumustputawayyourdiaryCecilyIreallydontseewhyyoushouldkeepadiaryatallCecilyIkeepadiaryinordertoenterthewonderfulsecretsofmylifeIfIdidntwritethemdownIshouldprobablyforgetallaboutthemMissPrismMemorymydearCecilyisthediarythatweallcarryaboutwithusCecilyYesbutitusuallychroniclesthethingsthathaveneverhappenedandcouldntpossiblyhavehappenedIbelievethatMemoryisresponsiblefornearlyallthethreevolumenovelsthatMudiesendsusMissPrismDonotspeakslightinglyofthethreevolumenovelCecilyIwroteonemyselfinearlierdaysCecilyDidyoureallyMissPrismHowwonderfullycleveryouareIhopeitdidnotendhappilyIdontlikenovelsthatendhappilyTheydepressmesomuchMissPrismThegoodendedhappilyandthebadunhappilyThatiswhatFictionmeansCecilyIsupposesoButitseemsveryunfairAndwasyournoveleverpublishedMissPrismAlasnoThemanuscriptunfortunatelywasabandonedCecilystartsIusethewordinthesenseoflostormislaidToyourworkchildthesespeculationsareprofitlessCecilySmilingButIseedearDrChasublecomingupthroughthegardenMissPrismRisingandadvancingDrChasubleThisisindeedapleasureEnterCanonChasubleChasubleAndhowarewethismorningMissPrismyouareItrustwellCecilyMissPrismhasjustbeencomplainingofaslightheadacheIthinkitwoulddohersomuchgoodtohaveashortstrollwithyouintheParkDrChasubleMissPrismCecilyIhavenotmentionedanythingaboutaheadacheCecilyNodearMissPrismIknowthatbutIfeltinstinctivelythatyouhadaheadacheIndeedIwasthinkingaboutthatandnotaboutmyGermanlessonwhentheRectorcameinChasubleIhopeCecilyyouarenotinattentiveCecilyOhIamafraidIamChasubleThatisstrangeWereIfortunateenoughtobeMissPrismspupilIwouldhanguponherlipsMissPrismglaresIspokemetaphoricallyMymetaphorwasdrawnfrombeesAhemMrWorthingIsupposehasnotreturnedfromtownyetMissPrismWedonotexpecthimtillMondayafternoonChasubleAhyesheusuallylikestospendhisSundayinLondonHeisnotoneofthosewhosesoleaimisenjoymentasbyallaccountsthatunfortunateyoungmanhisbrotherseemstobeButImustnotdisturbEgeriaandherpupilanylongerMissPrismEgeriaMynameisLaetitiaDoctorChasubleBowingAclassicalallusionmerelydrawnfromthePaganauthorsIshallseeyoubothnodoubtatEvensongMissPrismIthinkdearDoctorIwillhaveastrollwithyouIfindIhaveaheadacheafterallandawalkmightdoitgoodChasubleWithpleasureMissPrismwithpleasureWemightgoasfarastheschoolsandbackMissPrismThatwoueralreadyCecilyYouarelookingalittleworseAlgernonThatisbecauseIamhungryCecilyHowthoughtlessofmeIshouldhaverememberedthatwhenoneisgoingtoleadanentirelynewlifeonerequiresregularandwholesomemealsWontyoucomeinAlgernonThankyouMightIhaveabuttonholefirstIneverhaveanyappetiteunlessIhaveabuttonholefirstCecilyAMarechalNielPicksupscissorsAlgernonNoIdsoonerhaveapinkroseCecilyWhyCutsaflowerAlgernonBecauseyouarelikeapinkroseCousinCecilyCecilyIdontthinkitcanberightforyoutotalktomelikethatMissPrismneversayssuchthingstomeAlgernonThenMissPrismisashortsightedoldladyCecilyputstheroseinhisbuttonholeYouaretheprettiestgirlIeversawCecilyMissPrismsaysthatallgoodlooksareasnareAlgernonTheyareasnarethateverysensiblemanwouldliketobecaughtinCecilyOhIdontthinkIwouldcaretocatchasensiblemanIshouldntknowwhattotalktohimaboutTheypassintothehouseMissPrismandDrChasublereturnMissPrismYouaretoomuchalonedearDrChasubleYoushouldgetmarriedAmisanthropeIcanunderstandawomanthropeneverChasubleWithascholarsshudderBelievemeIdonotdeservesoneologisticaphraseThepreceptaswellasthepracticeofthePrimitiveChurchwasdistinctlyagainstmatrimonyMissPrismSententiouslyThatisobviouslythereasonwhythePrimitiveChurchhasnotlasteduptothepresentdayAndyoudonotseemtorealisedearDoctorthatbypersistentlyremainingsingleamanconvertshimselfintoapermanentpublictemptationMenshouldbemorecarefulthisverycelibacyleadsweakervesselsastrayChasubleButisamannotequallyattractivewhenmarriedMissPrismNomarriedmaniseverattractiveexcepttohiswifeChasubleAndoftenIvebeentoldnoteventoherMissPrismThatdependsontheintellectualsympathiesofthewomanMaturitycanalwaysbedependedonRipenesscanbetrustedYoungwomenaregreenDrChasublestartsIspokehorticulturallyMymetaphorwasdrawnfromfruitsButwhereisCecilyChasublePerhapsshefollowedustotheschoolsEnterJackslowlyfromthebackofthegardenHeisdressedinthedeepestmourningwithcrapehatbandandblackglovesMissPrismMrWorthingChasubleMrWorthingMissPrismThisisindeedasurpriseWedidnotlookforyoutillMondayafternoonJackShakesMissPrismshandinatragicmannerIhavereturnedsoonerthanIexpectedDrChasubleIhopeyouarewellChasubleDearMrWorthingItrustthisgarbofwoedoesnotbetokensometerriblecalamityJackMybrotherMissPrismMoreshamefuldebtsandextravaganceChasubleStillleadinghislifeofpleasureJackShakinghisheadDeadChasubleYourbrotherErnestdeadJackQuitedeadMissPrismWhatalessonforhimItrusthewillprofitbyitChasubleMrWorthingIofferyoumysincerecondolenceYouhaveatleasttheconsolationofknowingthatyouwerealwaysthemostgenerousandforgivingofbrothersJackPoorErnestHehadmanyfaultsbutitisasadsadblowChasubleVerysadindeedWereyouwithhimattheendJackNoHediedabroadinParisinfactIhadatelegramlastnightfromthemanageroftheGrandHotelChasubleWasthecauseofdeathmentionedJackAseverechillitseemsMissPrismAsamansowssoshallhereapChasubleRaisinghishandCharitydearMissPrismcharityNoneofusareperfectImyselfampeculiarlysusceptibletodraughtsWilltheintermenttakeplacehereJackNoHeseemstohaveexpressedadesiretobeburiedinParisChasubleInParisShakeshisheadIfearthathardlypointstoanyveryseriousstateofmindatthelastYouwouldnodoubtwishmetomakesomeslightallusiontothistragicdomesticafflictionnextSundayJackpresseshishandconvulsivelyMysermononthemeaningofthemannainthewildernesscanbeadaptedtoalmostanyoccasionjoyfulorasinthepresentcasedistressingAllsighIhavepreacheditatharvestcelebrationschristeningsconfirmationsondaysofhumiliationandfestaldaysThelasttimeIdelivereditwasintheCathedralasacharitysermononbehalfoftheSocietyforthePreventionofDiscontentamongtheUpperOrdersTheBishopwhowaspresentwasmuchstruckbysomeoftheanalogiesIdrewJackAhthatremindsmeyoumentionedchristeningsIthinkDrChasubleIsupposeyouknowhowtochristenallrightDrChasublelooksastoundedImeanofcourseyouarecontinuallychristeningarentyouMissPrismItisIregrettosayoneoftheRectorsmostconstantdutiesinthisparishIhaveoftenspokentothepoorerclassesonthesubjectButtheydontseemtoknowwhatthriftisChasubleButisthereanyparticularinfantinwhomyouareinterestedMrWorthingYourbrotherwasIbelieveunmarriedwashenotJackOhyesMissPrismBitterlyPeoplewholiveentirelyforpleasureusuallyareJackButitisnotforanychilddearDoctorIamveryfondofchildrenNothefactisIwouldliketobechristenedmyselfthisafternoonifyouhavenothingbettertodoChasubleButsurelyMrWorthingyouhavebeenchristenedalreadyJackIdontrememberanythingaboutitChasubleButhaveyouanygravedoubtsonthesubjectJackIcertainlyintendtohaveOfcourseIdontknowifthethingwouldbotheryouinanywayorifyouthinkIamalittletoooldnowChasubleNotatallThesprinklingandindeedtheimmersionofadultsisaperfectlycanonicalpracticeJackImmersionChasubleYouneedhavenoapprehensionsSprinklingisallthatisnecessaryorindeedIthinkadvisableOurweatherissochangeableAtwhathourwouldyouwishtheceremonyperformedounger brother who was very wicked and bad, you of course have
formed the chief topic of conversation between myself and Miss Prism.  And
of course a man who is much talked about is always very attractive.  One
feels there must be something in him, after all.  I daresay it was
foolish of me, but I fell in love with you, Ernest.

Algernon.  Darling!  And when was the engagement actually settled?

Cecily.  On the 14th of February last.  Worn out by your entire ignorance
of my existence, I determined to end the matter one way or the other, and
after a long struggle with myself I accepted you under this dear old tree
here.  The next day I bought this little ring in your name, and this is
the little bangle with the true lover's knot I promised you always to
wear.

Algernon.  Did I give you this?  It's very pretty, isn't it?

Cecily.  Yes, you've wonderfully good taste, Ernest.  It's the excuse
I've always given for your leading such a bad life.  And this is the box
in which I keep all your dear letters.  [Kneels at table, opens box, and
produces letters tied up with blue ribbon.]

Algernon.  My letters!  But, my own sweet Cecily, I have never written
you any letters.

Cecily.  You need hardly remind me of that, Ernest.  I remember only too
well that I was forced to write your letters for you.  I wrote always
three times a week, and sometimes oftener.

Algernon.  Oh, do let me read them, Cecily?

Cecily.  Oh, I couldn't possibly.  They would make you far too conceited.
[Replaces box.]  The three you wrote me after I had broken off the
engagement are so beautiful, and so badly spelled, that even now I can
hardly read them without crying a little.

Algernon.  But was our engagement ever broken off?

Cecily.  Of course it was.  On the 22nd of last March.  You can see the
entry if you like. [Shows diary.]  'To-day I broke off my engagement with
Ernest.  I feel it is better to do so.  The weather still continues
charming.'

Algernon.  But why on earth did you break it off?  What had I done?  I
had done nothing at all.  Cecily, I am very much hurt indeed to hear you
broke it off.  Particularly when the weather was so charming.

Cecily.  It would hardly have been a really serious engagement if it
hadn't been broken off at least once.  But I forgave you before the week
was out.

Algernon.  [Crossing to her, and kneeling.]  What a perfect angel you
are, Cecily.

Cecily.  You dear romantic boy.  [He kisses her, she puts her fingers
through his hair.]  I hope your hair curls naturally, does it?

Algernon.  Yes, darling, with a little help from others.

Cecily.  I am so glad.

Algernon.  You'll never break off our engagement again, Cecily?

Cecily.  I don't think I could break it off now that I have actually met
you.  Besides, of course, there is the question of your name.

Algernon.  Yes, of course.  [Nervously.]

Cecily.  You must not laugh at me, darling, but it had always been a
girlish dream of mine to love some one whose name was Ernest.  [Algernon
rises, Cecily also.]  There is something in that name that seems to
inspire absolute confidence.  I pity any poor married woman whose husband
is not called Ernest.

Algernon.  But, my dear child, do you mean to say you could not love me
if I had some other name?

Cecily.  But what name?

Algernon.  Oh, any name you like--Algernon--for instance . . .

Cecily.  But I don't like the name of Algernon.

Algernon.  Well, my own dear, sweet, loving little darling, I really
can't see why you should object to the name of Algernon.  It is not at
all a bad name.  In fact, it is rather an aristocratic name.  Half of the
chaps who get into the Bankruptcy Court are called Algernon.  But
seriously, Cecily . . . [Moving to her] . . . if my name was Algy,
couldn't you love me?

Cecily.  [Rising.]  I might respect you, Ernest, I might admire your
character, but I fear that I should not be able to give you my undivided
attention.

Algernon.  Ahem!  Cecily!  [Picking up hat.]  Your Rector here is, I
suppose, thoroughly experienced in the practice of all the rites and
ceremonials of the Church?

Cecily.  Oh, yes.  Dr. Chasuble is a most learned man.  He has never
written a single book, so you can imagine how much he knows.

Algernon.  I must see him at once on a most important christening--I mean
on most important business.

Cecily.  Oh!

Algernon.  I shan't be away more than half an hour.

Cecily.  Considering that we have been engaged since February the 14th,
and that I only met you to-day for the first time, I think it is rather
hard that you should leave me for so long a period as half an hour.
Couldn't you make it twenty minutes?

Algernon.  I'll be back in no time.

[Kisses her and rushes down the garden.]

Cecily.  What an impetuous boy he is!  I like his hair so much.  I must
enter his proposal in my diary.

[Enter Merriman.]

Merriman.  A Miss Fairfax has just called to see Mr. Worthing.  On very
important business, Miss Fairfax states.

Cecily.  Isn't Mr. Worthing in his library?

Merriman.  Mr. Worthing went over in the direction of the Rectory some
time ago.

Cecily.  Pray ask the lady to come out here; Mr. Worthing is sure to be
back soon.  And you can bring tea.

Merriman.  Yes, Miss.  [Goes out.]

Cecily.  Miss Fairfax!  I suppose one of the many good elderly women who
are associated with Uncle Jack in some of his philanthropic work in
London.  I don't quite like women who are interested in philanthropic
work.  I think it is so forward of them.

[Enter Merriman.]

Merriman.  Miss Fairfax.

[Enter Gwendolen.]

[Exit Merriman.]

Cecily.  [Advancing to meet her.]  Pray let me introduce myself to you.
My name is Cecily Cardew.

Gwendolen.  Cecily Cardew?  [Moving to her and shaking hands.]  What a
very sweet name!  Something tells me that we are going to be great
friends.  I like you already more than I can say.  My first impressions
of people are never wrong.

Cecily.  How nice of you to like me so much after we have known each
other such a comparatively short time.  Pray sit down.

Gwendolen.  [Still standing up.]  I may call you Cecily, may I not?

Cecily.  With pleasure!

Gwendolen.  And you will always call me Gwendolen, won't you?

Cecily.  If you wish.

Gwendolen.  Then that is all quite settled, is it not?

Cecily.  I hope so.  [A pause.  They both sit down together.]

Gwendolen.  Perhaps this might be a favourable opportunity for my
mentioning who I am.  My father is Lord Bracknell.  You have never heard
of papa, I suppose?

Cecily.  I don't think so.

Gwendolen.  Outside the family circle, papa, I am glad to say, is
entirely unknown.  I think that is quite as it should be.  The home seems
to me to be the proper sphere for the man.  And certainly once a man
begins to neglect his domestic duties he becomes painfully effeminate,
does he not?  And I don't like that.  It makes men so very attractive.
Cecily, mamma, whose views on education are remarkably strict, has
brought me up to be extremely short-sighted; it is part of her system; so
do you mind my looking at you through my glasses?

Cecily.  Oh! not at all, Gwendolen.  I am very fond of being looked at.

Gwendolen.  [After examining Cecily carefully through a lorgnette.]  You
are here on a short visit, I suppose.

Cecily.  Oh no!  I live here.

Gwendolen.  [Severely.]  Really?  Your mother, no doubt, or some female
relative of advanced years, resides here also?

Cecily.  Oh no!  I have no mother, nor, in fact, any relations.

Gwendolen.  Indeed?

Cecily.  My dear guardian, with the assistance of Miss Prism, has the
arduous task of looking after me.

Gwendolen.  Your guardian?

Cecily.  Yes, I am Mr. Worthing's ward.

Gwendolen.  Oh!  It is strange he never mentioned to me that he had a
ward.  How secretive of him!  He grows more interesting hourly.  I am not
sure, however, that the news inspires me with feelings of unmixed
delight.  [Rising and going to her.]  I am very fond of you, Cecily; I
have liked you ever since I met you!  But I am bound tJackOhImighttrotroundaboutfiveifthatwouldsuityouChasublePerfectlyperfectlyInfactIhavetwosimilarceremoniestoperformatthattimeAcaseoftwinsthatoccurredrecentlyinoneoftheoutlyingcottagesonyourownestatePoorJenkinsthecarteramosthardworkingmanJackOhIdontseemuchfuninbeingchristenedalongwithotherbabiesItwouldbechildishWouldhalfpastfivedoChasubleAdmirablyAdmirablyTakesoutwatchAndnowdearMrWorthingIwillnotintrudeanylongerintoahouseofsorrowIwouldmerelybegyounottobetoomuchboweddownbygriefWhatseemtousbittertrialsareoftenblessingsindisguiseMissPrismThisseemstomeablessingofanextremelyobviouskindEnterCecilyfromthehouseCecilyUncleJackOhIampleasedtoseeyoubackButwhathorridclothesyouhavegotonDogoandchangethemMissPrismCecilyChasubleMychildmychildCecilygoestowardsJackhekissesherbrowinamelancholymannerCecilyWhatisthematterUncleJackDolookhappyYoulookasifyouhadtoothacheandIhavegotsuchasurpriseforyouWhodoyouthinkisinthediningroomYourbrotherJackWhoCecilyYourbrotherErnestHearrivedabouthalfanhouragoJackWhatnonsenseIhaventgotabrotherCecilyOhdontsaythatHoweverbadlyhemayhavebehavedtoyouinthepastheisstillyourbrotherYoucouldntbesoheartlessastodisownhimIlltellhimtocomeoutAndyouwillshakehandswithhimwontyouUncleJackRunsbackintothehouseChasubleTheseareveryjoyfultidingsMissPrismAfterwehadallbeenresignedtohislosshissuddenreturnseemstomepeculiarlydistressingJackMybrotherisintoungerbrotherwhowasverywickedandbadyouofcoursehaveformedthechieftopicofconversationbetweenmyselfandMissPrismAndofcourseamanwhoismuchtalkedaboutisalwaysveryattractiveOnefeelstheremustbesomethinginhimafterallIdaresayitwasfoolishofmebutIfellinlovewithyouErnestAlgernonDarlingAndwhenwastheengagementactuallysettledCecilyOnthethofFebruarylastWornoutbyyourentireignoranceofmyexistenceIdeterminedtoendthematteronewayortheotherandafteralongstrugglewithmyselfIacceptedyouunderthisdearoldtreehereThenextdayIboughtthislittleringinyournameandthisisthelittlebanglewiththetrueloversknotIpromisedyoualwaystowearAlgernonDidIgiveyouthisItsveryprettyisntitCecilyYesyouvewonderfullygoodtasteErnestItstheexcuseIvealwaysgivenforyourleadingsuchabadlifeAndthisistheboxinwhichIkeepallyourdearlettersKneelsattableopensboxandproducesletterstiedupwithblueribbonAlgernonMylettersButmyownsweetCecilyIhaveneverwrittenyouanylettersCecilyYouneedhardlyremindmeofthatErnestIrememberonlytoowellthatIwasforcedtowriteyourlettersforyouIwrotealwaysthreetimesaweekandsometimesoftenerAlgernonOhdoletmereadthemCecilyCecilyOhIcouldntpossiblyTheywouldmakeyoufartooconceitedReplacesboxThethreeyouwrotemeafterIhadbrokenofftheengagementaresobeautifulandsobadlyspelledthatevennowIcanhardlyreadthemwithoutcryingalittleAlgernonButwasourengagementeverbrokenoffCecilyOfcourseitwasOnthendoflastMarchYoucanseetheentryifyoulikeShowsdiaryTodayIbrokeoffmyengagementwithErnestIfeelitisbettertodosoTheweatherstillcontinuescharmingAlgernonButwhyonearthdidyoubreakitoffWhathadIdoneIhaddonenothingatallCecilyIamverymuchhurtindeedtohearyoubrokeitoffParticularlywhentheweatherwassocharmingCecilyItwouldhardlyhavebeenareallyseriousengagementifithadntbeenbrokenoffatleastonceButIforgaveyoubeforetheweekwasoutAlgernonCrossingtoherandkneelingWhataperfectangelyouareCecilyCecilyYoudearromanticboyHekisseshersheputsherfingersthroughhishairIhopeyourhaircurlsnaturallydoesitAlgernonYesdarlingwithalittlehelpfromothersCecilyIamsogladAlgernonYoullneverbreakoffourengagementagainCecilyCecilyIdontthinkIcouldbreakitoffnowthatIhaveactuallymetyouBesidesofcoursethereisthequestionofyournameAlgernonYesofcourseNervouslyCecilyYoumustnotlaughatmedarlingbutithadalwaysbeenagirlishdreamofminetolovesomeonewhosenamewasErnestAlgernonrisesCecilyalsoThereissomethinginthatnamethatseemstoinspireabsoluteconfidenceIpityanypoormarriedwomanwhosehusbandisnotcalledErnestAlgernonButmydearchilddoyoumeantosayyoucouldnotlovemeifIhadsomeothernameCecilyButwhatnameAlgernonOhanynameyoulikeAlgernonforinstanceCecilyButIdontlikethenameofAlgernonAlgernonWellmyowndearsweetlovinglittledarlingIreallycantseewhyyoushouldobjecttothenameofAlgernonItisnotatallabadnameInfactitisratheranaristocraticnameHalfofthe by the footman.  He carries a salver, table
cloth, and plate stand.  Cecily is about to retort.  The presence of the
servants exercises a restraining influence, under which both girls
chafe.]

Merriman.  Shall I lay tea here as usual, Miss?

Cecily.  [Sternly, in a calm voice.]  Yes, as usual.  [Merriman begins to
clear table and lay cloth.  A long pause.  Cecily and Gwendolen glare at
each other.]

Gwendolen.  Are there many interesting walks in the vicinity, Miss
Cardew?

Cecily.  Oh! yes! a great many.  From the top of one of the hills quite
close one can see five counties.

Gwendolen.  Five counties!  I don't think I should like that; I hate
crowds.

Cecily.  [Sweetly.]  I suppose that is why you live in town?  [Gwendolen
bites her lip, and beats her foot nervously with her parasol.]

Gwendolen.  [Looking round.]  Quite a well-kept garden this is, Miss
Cardew.

Cecily.  So glad you like it, Miss Fairfax.

Gwendolen.  I had no idea there were any flowers in the country.

Cecily.  Oh, flowers are as common here, Miss Fairfax, as people are in
London.

Gwendolen.  Personally I cannot understand how anybody manages to exist
in the country, if anybody who is anybody does.  The country always bores
me to death.

Cecily.  Ah!  This is what the newspapers call agricultural depression,
is it not?  I believe the aristocracy are suffering very much from it
just at present.  It is almost an epidemic amongst them, I have been
told.  May I offer you some tea, Miss Fairfax?

Gwendolen.  [With elaborate politeness.]  Thank you.  [Aside.]  Detestable
girl!  But I require tea!

Cecily.  [Sweetly.]  Sugar?

Gwendolen.  [Superciliously.]  No, thank you.  Sugar is not fashionable
any more. [Cecily looks angrily at her, takes up the tongs and puts four
lumps of sugar into the cup.]

Cecily.  [Severely.]  Cake or bread and butter?

Gwendolen.  [In a bored manner.]  Bread and butter, please.  Cake is
rarely seen at the best houses nowadays.

Cecily.  [Cuts a very large slice of cake, and puts it on the tray.]  Hand
that to Miss Fairfax.

[Merriman does so, and goes out with footman.  Gwendolen drinks the tea
and makes a grimace.  Puts down cup at once, reaches out her hand to the
bread and butter, looks at it, and finds it is cake.  Rises in
indignation.]

Gwendolen.  You have filled my tea with lumps of sugar, and though I
asked most distinctly for bread and butter, you have given me cake.  I am
known for the gentleness of my disposition, and the extraordinary
sweetness of my nature, but I warn you, Miss Cardew, you may go too far.

Cecily.  [Rising.]  To save my poor, innocent, trusting boy from the
machinations of any other girl there are no lengths to which I would not
go.

Gwendolen.  From the moment I saw you I distrusted you.  I felt that you
were false and deceitful.  I am never deceived in such matters.  My first
impressions of people are invariably right.

Cecily.  It seems to me, Miss Fairfax, that I am trespassing on your
valuable time.  No doubt you have many other calls of a similar character
to make in the neighbourhood.

[Enter Jack.]

Gwendolen.  [Catching sight of him.]  Ernest!  My own Ernest!

Jack.  Gwendolen!  Darling!  [Offers to kiss her.]

Gwendolen.  [Draws back.]  A moment!  May I ask if you are engaged to be
married to this young lady?  [Points to Cecily.]

Jack.  [Laughing.]  To dear little Cecily!  Of course not!  What could
have put such an idea into your pretty little head?

Gwendolen.  Thank you.  You may!  [Offers her cheek.]

Cecily.  [Very sweetly.]  I knew there must be some misunderstanding,
Miss Fairfax.  The gentleman whose arm is at present round your waist is
my guardian, Mr. John Worthing.

Gwendolen.  I beg your pardon?

Cecily.  This is Uncle Jack.

Gwendolen.  [Receding.]  Jack!  Oh!

[Enter Algernon.]

Cecily.  Here is Ernest.

Algernon.  [Goes straight over to Cecily without noticing any one else.]
My own love!  [Offers to kiss her.]

Cecily.  [Drawing back.]  A moment, Ernest!  May I ask you--are you
engaged to be married to this young lady?

Algernon.  [Looking round.]  To what young lady?  Good heavens!
Gwendolen!

Cecily.  Yes! to good heavens, Gwendolen, I mean to Gwendolen.

Algernon.  [Laughing.]  Of course not!  What could have put such an idea
into your pretty little head?

Cecily.  Thank you.  [Presenting her cheek to be kissed.]  You may.
[Algernon kisses her.]

Gwendolen.  I felt there was some slight error, Miss Cardew.  The
gentleman who is now embracing you is my cousin, Mr. Algernon Moncrieff.

Cecily.  [Breaking away from Algernon.]  Algernon Moncrieff!  Oh!  [The
two girls move towards each other and put their arms round each other's
waists as if for protection.]

Cecily.  Are you called Algernon?

Algernon.  I cannot deny it.

Cecily.  Oh!

Gwendolen.  Is your name really John?

Jack.  [Standing rather proudly.]  I could deny it if I liked.  I could
deny anything if I liked.  But my name certainly is John.  It has been
John for years.

Cecily.  [To Gwendolen.]  A gross deception has been practised on both of
us.

Gwendolen.  My poor wounded Cecily!

Cecily.  My sweet wronged Gwendolen!

Gwendolen.  [Slowly and seriously.]  You will call me sister, will you
not?  [They embrace.  Jack and Algernon groan and walk up and down.]

Cecily.  [Rather brightly.]  There is just one question I would like to
be allowed to ask my guardian.

Gwendolen.  An admirable idea!  Mr. Worthing, there is just one question
I would like to be permitted to put to you.  Where is your brother
Ernest?  We are both engaged to be married to your brother Ernest, so it
is a matter of some importance to us to know where your brother Ernest is
at present.

Jack.  [Slowly and hesitatingly.]  Gwendolen--Cecily--it is very painful
for me to be forced to speak the truth.  It is the first time in my life
that I have ever been reduced to such a painful position, and I am really
quite inexperienced in doing anything of the kind.  However, I will tell
you quite frankly that I have no brother Ernest.  I have no brother at
all.  I never had a brother in my life, and I certainly have not the
smallest intention of ever having one in the future.

Cecily.  [Surprised.]  No brother at all?

Jack.  [Cheerily.]  None!

Gwendolen.  [Severely.]  Had you never a brother of any kind?

Jack.  [Pleasantly.]  Never.  Not even of any kind.

Gwendolen.  I am afraid it is quite clear, Cecily, that neither of us is
engaged to be married to any one.

Cecily.  It is not a very pleasant position for a young girl suddenly to
find herself in.  Is it?

Gwendolen.  Let us go into the house.  They will hardly venture to come
after us there.

Cecily.  No, men are so cowardly, aren't they?

[They retire into the house with scornful looks.]

Jack.  This ghastly state of things is what you call Bunburying, I
suppose?

Algernon.  Yes, and a perfectly wonderful Bunbury it is.  The most
wonderful Bunbury I have ever had in my life.

Jack.  Well, you've no right whatsoever to Bunbury here.

Algernon.  That is absurd.  One has a right to Bunbury anywhere one
chooses.  Every serious Bunburyist knows that.

Jack.  Serious Bunburyist!  Good heavens!

Algernon.  Well, one must be serious about something, if one wants to
have any amusement in life.  I happen to be serious about Bunburying.
What on earth you are serious about I haven't got the remotest idea.
About everything, I should fancy.  You have such an absolutely trivial
nature.

Jack.  Well, the only small satisfaction I have in the whole of this
wretched business is that your friend Bunbury is quite exploded.  You
won't be able to run down to the country quite so often as you used to
do, dear Algy.  And a very good thing too.

Algernon.  Your brother is a little off colour, isn't he, dear Jack?  You
won't be able to disappear to London quite so frequently as your wicked
custom was.  And not a bad thing either.

Jack.  As for your conduct towards Miss Cardew, I must say that your
taking in a sweet, chapswhogetintotheBankruptcyCourtarecalledAlgernonButseriouslyCecilyMovingtoherifmynamewasAlgycouldntyoulovemeCecilyRisingImightrespectyouErnestImightadmireyourcharacterbutIfearthatIshouldnotbeabletogiveyoumyundividedattentionAlgernonAhemCecilyPickinguphatYourRectorhereisIsupposethoroughlyexperiencedinthepracticeofalltheritesandceremonialsoftheChurchCecilyOhyesDrChasubleisamostlearnedmanHehasneverwrittenasinglebooksoyoucanimaginehowmuchheknowsAlgernonImustseehimatonceonamostimportantchristeningImeanonmostimportantbusinessCecilyOhAlgernonIshantbeawaymorethanhalfanhourCecilyConsideringthatwehavebeenengagedsinceFebruarythethandthatIonlymetyoutodayforthefirsttimeIthinkitisratherhardthatyoushouldleavemeforsolongaperiodashalfanhourCouldntyoumakeittwentyminutesAlgernonIllbebackinnotimeKissesherandrushesdownthegardenCecilyWhatanimpetuousboyheisIlikehishairsomuchImustenterhisproposalinmydiaryEnterMerrimanMerrimanAMissFairfaxhasjustcalledtoseeMrWorthingOnveryimportantbusinessMissFairfaxstatesCecilyIsntMrWorthinginhislibraryMerrimanMrWorthingwentoverinthedirectionoftheRectorysometimeagoCecilyPrayasktheladytocomeouthereMrWorthingissuretobebacksoonAndyoucanbringteaMerrimanYesMissGoesoutCecilyMissFairfaxIsupposeoneofthemanygoodelderlywomenwhoareassociatedwithUncleJackinsomeofhisphilanthropicworkinLondonIdontquitelikewomenwhoareinterestedinphilanthropicworkIthinkitissoforwardofthemEnterMerrimanMerrimanMissFairfaxEnterGwendolenExitMerrimanCecilyAdvancingtomeetherPrayletmeintroducemyselftoyouMynameisCecilyCardewGwendolenCecilyCardewMovingtoherandshakinghandsWhataverysweetnameSomethingtellsmethatwearegoingtobegreatfriendsIlikeyoualreadymorethanIcansayMyfirstimpressionsofpeopleareneverwrongCecilyHowniceofyoutolikemesomuchafterwehaveknowneachothersuchacomparativelyshorttimePraysitdownGwendolenStillstandingupImaycallyouCecilymayInotCecilyWithpleasureGwendolenAndyouwillalwayscallmeGwendolenwontyouCecilyIfyouwishGwendolenThenthatisallquitesettledisitnotCecilyIhopesoApauseTheybothsitdowntogetherGwendolenPerhapsthismightbeafavourableopportunityformymentioningwhoIamMyfatherisLordBracknellYouhaveneverheardofpapaIsupposeCecilyIdontthinksoGwendolenOutsidethefamilycirclepapaIamgladtosayisentirelyunknownIthinkthatisquiteasitshouldbeThehomeseemstometobethepropersphereforthemanAndcertainlyonceamanbeginstoneglecthisdomesticdutieshebecomespainfullyeffeminatedoeshenotAndIdontlikethatItmakesmensoveryattractiveCecilymammawhoseviewsoneducationareremarkablystricthasbroughtmeuptobeextremelyshortsighteditispartofhersystemsodoyoumindmylookingatyouthroughmyglassesCecilyOhnotatallGwendolenIamveryfondofbeinglookedatGwendolenAfterexaminingCecilycarefullythroughalorgnetteYouarehereonashortvisitIsupposeCecilyOhnoIlivehereGwendolenSeverelyReallyYourmothernodoubtorsomefemalerelativeofadvancedyearsresidesherealsoCecilyOhnoIhavenomothernorinfactanyrelationsGwendolenIndeedCecilyMydearguardianwiththeassistanceofMissPrismhasthearduoustaskoflookingaftermeGwendolenYourguardianCecilyYesIamMrWorthingswardGwendolenOhItisstrangehenevermentionedtomethathehadawardHowsecretiveofhimHegrowsmoreinterestinghourlyIamnotsurehoweverthatthenewsinspiresmewithfeelingsofunmixeddelightRisingandgoingtoherIamveryfondofyouCecilyIhavelikedyoueversinceImetyouButIamboundtbythefootmanHecarriesasalvertableclothandplatestandCecilyisabouttoretortThepresenceoftheservantsexercisesarestraininginfluenceunderwhichbothgirlschafeMerrimanShallIlayteahereasusualMissCecilySternlyinacalmvoiceYesasusualMerrimanbeginstocleartableandlayclothAlongpauseCecilyandGwendolenglareateachotherGwendolenAretheremanyinterestingwalksinthevicinityMissCardewCecilyOhyesagreatmanyFromthetopofoneofthehillsquitecloseonecanseefivecountiesGwendolenFivecountiesIdontthinkIshouldlikethatIhatecrowdsCecilySweetlyIsupposethatiswhyyouliveintownGwendolenbitesherlipandbeatsherfootnervouslywithherparasolGwendolenLookingroundQuiteawellkeptgardenthisisMissCardewCecilySogladyoulikeitMissFairfaxGwendolenIhadnoideatherewereanyflowersinthecountryCecilyOhflowersareascommonhereMissFairfaxaspeopleareinLondonGwendolenPersonallyIcannotunderstandhowanybodymanagestoexistinthecountryifanybodywhoisanybodydoesThecountryalwaysboresmetodeathCecilyAhThisiswhatthenewspaperscallagriculturaldepressionisitnotIbelievethearistocracyaresufferingverymuchfromitjustatpresentItisalmostanepidemicamongstthemIhavebeentoldMayIofferyousometeaMissFairfaxGwendolenWithelaboratepolitenessThankyouAsideDetestablegirlButIrequireteaCecilySweetlySugarGwendolenSuperciliouslyNothankyouSugarisnotfashionableanymoreCecilylooksangrilyathertakesupthetongsandputsfourlumpsofsugarintothecupCecilySeverelyCakeorbreadandbutterGwendolenInaboredmannerBreadandbutterpleaseCakeisrarelyseenatthebesthousesnowadaysCecilyCutsaverylargesliceofcakeandputsitonthetrayHandthattoMissFairfaxMerrimandoessoandgoesoutwithfootmanGwendolendrinkstheteaandmakesagrimacePutsdowncupatoncereachesoutherhandtothebreadandbutterlooksatitandfindsitiscakeRisesinindignationGwendolenYouhavefilledmyteawithlumpsofsugarandthoughIaskedmostdistinctlyforbreadandbutteryouhavegivenmecakeIamknownforthegentlenessofmydispositionandtheextraordinarysweetnessofmynaturebutIwarnyouMissCardewyoumaygotoofarCecilyRisingTosavemypoorinnocenttrustingboyfromthemachinationsofanyothergirltherearenolengthstowhichIwouldnotgoGwendolenFromthemomentIsawyouIdistrustedyouIfeltthatyouwerefalseanddeceitfulIamneverdeceivedinsuchmattersMyfirstimpressionsofpeopleareinvariablyrightCecilyItseemstomeMissFairfaxthatIamtrespassingonyourvaluabletimeNodoubtyouhavemanyothercallsofasimilarcharactertomakeintheneighbourhoodEnterJackGwendolenCatchingsightofhimErnestMyownErnestJackGwendolenDarlingOfferstokissherGwendolenDrawsbackAmomentMayIaskifyouareengagedtobemarriedtothisyoungladyPointstoCecilyJackLaughingTodearlittleCecilyOfcoursenotWhatcouldhaveputsuchanideaintoyourprettylittleheadGwendolenThankyouYoumayOffershercheekCecilyVerysweetlyIknewtheremustbesomemisunderstandingMissFairfaxThegentlemanwhosearmisatpresentroundyourwaistismyguardianMrJohnWorthingGwendolenIbegyourpardonCecilyThisisUncleJackGwendolenRecedingJackOhEnterAlgernonCecilyHereisErnestAlgernonGoesstraightovertoCecilywithoutnoticinganyoneelseMyownloveOfferstokissherCecilyDrawingbackAmomentErnestMayIaskyouareyouengagedtobemarriedtothisyoungladyAlgernonLookingroundTowhatyoungladyGoodheavensGwendolenCecilyYestogoodheavensGwendolenImeantoGwendolenAlgernonLaughingOfcoursenotWhatcouldhaveputsuchanideaintoyourprettylittleheadCecilyThankyouPresentinghercheektobekissedYoumayAlgernonkissesherGwendolenIfelttherewassomeslighterrorMissCardewThegentlemanwhoisnowembracingyouismycousinMrAlgernonMoncrieffCecilyBreakingawayfromAlgernonAlgernonMoncrieffOhThetwogirlsmovetowardseachotherandputtheirarmsroundeachotherswaistsasifforprotectionCecilyAreyoucalledAlgernonAlgernonIcannotdenyitCecilyOhGwendolenIsyournamereallyJohnJackStandingratherproudlyIcoulddenyitifIlikedIcoulddenyanythingifIlikedButmynamecertainlyisJohnIthasbeenJohnforyearsCecilyToGwendolenAgrossdeceptionhasbeenpractisedonbothofusGwendolenMypoorwoundedCecilyCecilyMysweetwrongedGwendolenGwendolenSlowlyandseriouslyYouwillcallmesisterwillyounotTheyembraceJackandAlgernongroanandwalkupanddownCecilyRatherbrightlyThereisjustonequestionIwouldliketobeallowedtoaskmyguardianGwendolenAnadmirableideaMrWorthingthereisjustonequestionIwouldliketobepermittedtoputtoyouWhereisyourbrotherErnestWearebothengagedtobemarriedtoyourbrotherErnestsoitisamatterofsomeimportancetoustoknowwhereyourbrotherErnestisatpresentJackSlowlyandhesitatinglyGwendolenCecilyitisverypainfulformetobeforcedtospeakthetruthItisthefirsttimeinmylifethatIhaveeverbeenreducedtosuchapainfulpositionandIamreallyquiteinexperiencedindoinganythingofthekindHoweverIwilltellyouquitefranklythatIhavenobrotherErnestIhavenobrotheratallIneverhadabrotherinmylifeandIcertainlyhavenotthesmallestintentionofeverhavingoneinthefutureCecilySurprisedNobrotheratallJackCheerilyNoneGwendolenSeverelyHadyouneverabrotherofanykindJackPleasantlyNeverNotevenofanykindGwendolenIamafraiditisquiteclearCecilythatneitherofusisengagedtobemarriedtoanyoneCecilyItisnotaverypleasantpositionforayounggirlsuddenlytofindherselfinIsitwhich we women know
absolutely nothing.

Gwendolen.  [To Jack.]  Darling!

Algernon.  [To Cecily.]  Darling!  [They fall into each other's arms.]

[Enter Merriman.  When he enters he coughs loudly, seeing the situation.]

Merriman.  Ahem!  Ahem!  Lady Bracknell!

Jack.  Good heavens!

[Enter Lady Bracknell.  The couples separate in alarm.  Exit Merriman.]

Lady Bracknell.  Gwendolen!  What does this mean?

Gwendolen.  Merely that I am engaged to be married to Mr. Worthing,
mamma.

Lady Bracknell.  Come here.  Sit down.  Sit down immediately.  Hesitation
of any kind is a sign of mental decay in the young, of physical weakness
in the old.  [Turns to Jack.]  Apprised, sir, of my daughter's sudden
flight by her trusty maid, whose confidence I purchased by means of a
small coin, I followed her at once by a luggage train.  Her unhappy
father is, I am glad to say, under the impression that she is attending a
more than usually lengthy lecture by the University Extension Scheme on
the Influence of a permanent income on Thought.  I do not propose to
undeceive him.  Indeed I have never undeceived him on any question.  I
would consider it wrong.  But of course, you will clearly understand that
all communication between yourself and my daughter must cease immediately
from this moment.  On this point, as indeed on all points, I am firm.

Jack.  I am engaged to be married to Gwendolen, Lady Bracknell!

Lady Bracknell.  You are nothing of the kind, sir.  And now, as regards
Algernon! . . . Algernon!

Algernon.  Yes, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  May I ask if it is in this house that your invalid
friend Mr. Bunbury resides?

Algernon.  [Stammering.]  Oh!  No!  Bunbury doesn't live here.  Bunbury
is somewhere else at present.  In fact, Bunbury is dead.

Lady Bracknell.  Dead!  When did Mr. Bunbury die?  His death must have
been extremely sudden.

Algernon.  [Airily.]  Oh!  I killed Bunbury this afternoon.  I mean poor
Bunbury died this afternoon.

Lady Bracknell.  What did he die of?

Algernon.  Bunbury?  Oh, he was quite exploded.

Lady Bracknell.  Exploded!  Was he the victim of a revolutionary outrage?
I was not aware that Mr. Bunbury was interested in social legislation.  If
so, he is well punished for his morbidity.

Algernon.  My dear Aunt Augusta, I mean he was found out!  The doctors
found out that Bunbury could not live, that is what I mean--so Bunbury
died.

Lady Bracknell.  He seems to have had great confidence in the opinion of
his physicians.  I am glad, however, that he made up his mind at the last
to some definite course of action, and acted under proper medical advice.
And now that we have finally got rid of this Mr. Bunbury, may I ask, Mr.
Worthing, who is that young person whose hand my nephew Algernon is now
holding in what seems to me a peculiarly unnecessary manner?

Jack.  That lady is Miss Cecily Cardew, my ward.  [Lady Bracknell bows
coldly to Cecily.]

Algernon.  I am engaged to be married to Cecily, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  I beg your pardon?

Cecily.  Mr. Moncrieff and I are engaged to be married, Lady Bracknell.

Lady Bracknell.  [With a shiver, crossing to the sofa and sitting down.]
I do not know whether there is anything peculiarly exciting in the air of
this particular part of Hertfordshire, but the number of engagements that
go on seems to me considerably above the proper average that statistics
have laid down for our guidance.  I think some preliminary inquiry on my
part would not be out of place.  Mr. Worthing, is Miss Cardew at all
connected with any of the larger railway stations in London?  I merely
desire information.  Until yesterday I had no idea that there were any
families or persons whose origin was a Terminus.  [Jack looks perfectly
furious, but restrains himself.]

Jack.  [In a clear, cold voice.]  Miss Cardew is the grand-daughter of
the late Mr. Thomas Cardew of 149 Belgrave Square, S.W.; Gervase Park,
Dorking, Surrey; and the Sporran, Fifeshire, N.B.

Lady Bracknell.  That sounds not unsatisfactory.  Three addresses always
inspire confidence, even in tradesmen.  But what proof have I of their
authenticity?

Jack.  I have carefully preserved the Court Guides of the period.  They
are open to your inspection, Lady Bracknell.

Lady Bracknell.  [Grimly.]  I have known strange errors in that
publication.

Jack.  Miss Cardew's family solicitors are Messrs. Markby, Markby, and
Markby.

Lady Bracknell.  Markby, Markby, and Markby?  A firm of the very highest
position in their profession.  Indeed I am told that one of the Mr.
Markby's is occasionally to be seen at dinner parties.  So far I am
satisfied.

Jack.  [Very irritably.]  How extremely kind of you, Lady Bracknell!  I
have also in my possession, you will be pleased to hear, certificates of
Miss Cardew's birth, baptism, whooping cough, registration, vaccination,
confirmation, and the measles; both the German and the English variety.

Lady Bracknell.  Ah! A life crowded with incident, I see; though perhaps
somewhat too exciting for a young girl.  I am not myself in favour of
premature experiences.  [Rises, looks at her watch.]  Gwendolen! the time
approaches for our departure.  We have not a moment to lose.  As a matter
of form, Mr. Worthing, I had better ask you if Miss Cardew has any little
fortune?

Jack.  Oh! about a hundred and thirty thousand pounds in the Funds.  That
is all.  Goodbye, Lady Bracknell.  So pleased to have seen you.

Lady Bracknell.  [Sitting down again.]  A moment, Mr. Worthing.  A
hundred and thirty thousand pounds!  And in the Funds!  Miss Cardew seems
to me a most attractive young lady, now that I look at her.  Few girls of
the present day have any really solid qualities, any of the qualities
that last, and improve with time.  We live, I regret to say, in an age of
surfaces.  [To Cecily.]  Come over here, dear.  [Cecily goes across.]
Pretty child! your dress is sadly simple, and your hair seems almost as
Nature might have left it.  But we can soon alter all that.  A thoroughly
experienced French maid produces a really marvellous result in a very
brief space of time.  I remember recommending one to young Lady Lancing,
and after three months her own husband did not know her.

Jack.  And after six months nobody knew her.

Lady Bracknell.  [Glares at Jack for a few moments.  Then bends, with a
practised smile, to Cecily.]  Kindly turn round, sweet child.  [Cecily
turns completely round.]  No, the side view is what I want.  [Cecily
presents her profile.]  Yes, quite as I expected.  There are distinct
social possibilities in your profile.  The two weak points in our age are
its want of principle and its want of profile.  The chin a little higher,
dear.  Style largely depends on the way the chin is worn.  They are worn
very high, just at present.  Algernon!

Algernon.  Yes, Aunt Augusta!

Lady Bracknell.  There are distinct social possibilities in Miss Cardew's
profile.

Algernon.  Cecily is the sweetest, dearest, prettiest girl in the whole
world.  And I don't care twopence about social possibilities.

Lady Bracknell.  Never speak disrespectfully of Society, Algernon.  Only
people who can't get into it do that.  [To Cecily.]  Dear child, of
course you know that Algernon has nothing but his debts to depend upon.
But I do not approve of mercenary marriages.  When I married Lord
Bracknell I had no fortune of any kind.  But I never dreamed for a moment
of allowing that to stand in my way.  Well, I suppose I must give my
consent.

Algernon.  Thank you, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  Cecily, you may kiss me!

Cecily.  [Kisses her.]  Thank you, Lady Bracknell.

Lady Bracknell.  You may also address me as Aunt Augusta for the future.

Cecily.  Thank you, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  The marriage, I think, had better take place quite soon.

Algernon.  Thank you, Aunt Augusta.

Cecily.  Thank you, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  To speak frankly, I am not in favour of long
engagements.  They give people the opportunity of finding out each
other's character GwendolenLetusgointothehouseTheywillhardlyventuretocomeafterusthereCecilyNomenaresocowardlyarenttheyTheyretireintothehousewithscornfullooksJackThisghastlystateofthingsiswhatyoucallBunburyingIsupposeAlgernonYesandaperfectlywonderfulBunburyitisThemostwonderfulBunburyIhaveeverhadinmylifeJackWellyouvenorightwhatsoevertoBunburyhereAlgernonThatisabsurdOnehasarighttoBunburyanywhereonechoosesEveryseriousBunburyistknowsthatJackSeriousBunburyistGoodheavensAlgernonWellonemustbeseriousaboutsomethingifonewantstohaveanyamusementinlifeIhappentobeseriousaboutBunburyingWhatonearthyouareseriousaboutIhaventgottheremotestideaAbouteverythingIshouldfancyYouhavesuchanabsolutelytrivialnatureJackWelltheonlysmallsatisfactionIhaveinthewholeofthiswretchedbusinessisthatyourfriendBunburyisquiteexplodedYouwontbeabletorundowntothecountryquitesooftenasyouusedtododearAlgyAndaverygoodthingtooAlgernonYourbrotherisalittleoffcolourisnthedearJackYouwontbeabletodisappeartoLondonquitesofrequentlyasyourwickedcustomwasAndnotabadthingeitherJackAsforyourconducttowardsMissCardewImustsaythatyourtakinginasweetwhichwewomenknowabsolutelynothingGwendolenToJackDarlingAlgernonToCecilyDarlingTheyfallintoeachothersarmsEnterMerrimanWhenheentershecoughsloudlyseeingthesituationMerrimanAhemAhemLadyBracknellJackGoodheavensEnterLadyBracknellThecouplesseparateinalarmExitMerrimanLadyBracknellGwendolenWhatdoesthismeanGwendolenMerelythatIamengagedtobemarriedtoMrWorthingmammaLadyBracknellComehereSitdownSitdownimmediatelyHesitationofanykindisasignofmentaldecayintheyoungofphysicalweaknessintheoldTurnstoJackApprisedsirofmydaughterssuddenflightbyhertrustymaidwhoseconfidenceIpurchasedbymeansofasmallcoinIfollowedheratoncebyaluggagetrainHerunhappyfatherisIamgladtosayundertheimpressionthatsheisattendingamorethanusuallylengthylecturebytheUniversityExtensionSchemeontheInfluenceofapermanentincomeonThoughtIdonotproposetoundeceivehimIndeedIhaveneverundeceivedhimonanyquestionIwouldconsideritwrongButofcourseyouwillclearlyunderstandthatallcommunicationbetweenyourselfandmydaughtermustceaseimmediatelyfromthismomentOnthispointasindeedonallpointsIamfirmJackIamengagedtobemarriedtoGwendolenLadyBracknellLadyBracknellYouarenothingofthekindsirAndnowasregardsAlgernonAlgernonAlgernonYesAuntAugustaLadyBracknellMayIaskifitisinthishousethatyourinvalidfriendMrBunburyresidesAlgernonStammeringOhNoBunburydoesntlivehereBunburyissomewhereelseatpresentInfactBunburyisdeadLadyBracknellDeadWhendidMrBunburydieHisdeathmusthavebeenextremelysuddenAlgernonAirilyOhIkilledBunburythisafternoonImeanpoorBunburydiedthisafternoonLadyBracknellWhatdidhedieofAlgernonBunburyOhhewasquiteexplodedLadyBracknellExplodedWashethevictimofarevolutionaryoutrageIwasnotawarethatMrBunburywasinterestedinsociallegislationIfsoheiswellpunishedforhismorbidityAlgernonMydearAuntAugustaImeanhewasfoundoutThedoctorsfoundoutthatBunburycouldnotlivethatiswhatImeansoBunburydiedLadyBracknellHeseemstohavehadgreatconfidenceintheopinionofhisphysiciansIamgladhoweverthathemadeuphismindatthelasttosomedefinitecourseofactionandactedunderpropermedicaladviceAndnowthatwehavefinallygotridofthisMrBunburymayIaskMrWorthingwhoisthatyoungpersonwhosehandmynephewAlgernonisnowholdinginwhatseemstomeapeculiarlyunnecessarymannerJackThatladyisMissCecilyCardewmywardLadyBracknellbowscoldlytoCecilyAlgernonIamengagedtobemarriedtoCecilyAuntAugustaLadyBracknellIbegyourpardonCecilyMrMoncrieffandIareengagedtobemarriedLadyBracknellLadyBracknellWithashivercrossingtothesofaandsittingdownIdonotknowwhetherthereisanythingpeculiarlyexcitingintheairofthisparticularpartofHertfordshirebutthenumberofengagementsthatgoonseemstomeconsiderablyabovetheproperaveragethatstatisticshavelaiddownforourguidanceIthinksomepreliminaryinquiryonmypartwouldnotbeoutofplaceMrWorthingisMissCardewatallconnectedwithanyofthelargerrailwaystationsinLondonImerelydesireinformationUntilyesterdayIhadnoideathattherewereanyfamiliesorpersonswhoseoriginwasaTerminusJacklooksperfectlyfuriousbutrestrainshimselfJackInaclearcoldvoiceMissCardewisthegranddaughterofthelateMrThomasCardewofBelgraveSquareSWGervaseParkDorkingSurreyandtheSporranFifeshireNB-five--a remark which I am bound
to say seems to me to show a somewhat impatient nature--I would beg of
you to reconsider your decision.

Jack.  But my dear Lady Bracknell, the matter is entirely in your own
hands.  The moment you consent to my marriage with Gwendolen, I will most
gladly allow your nephew to form an alliance with my ward.

Lady Bracknell.  [Rising and drawing herself up.]  You must be quite
aware that what you propose is out of the question.

Jack.  Then a passionate celibacy is all that any of us can look forward
to.

Lady Bracknell.  That is not the destiny I propose for Gwendolen.
Algernon, of course, can choose for himself.  [Pulls out her watch.]
Come, dear, [Gwendolen rises] we have already missed five, if not six,
trains.  To miss any more might expose us to comment on the platform.

[Enter Dr. Chasuble.]

Chasuble.  Everything is quite ready for the christenings.

Lady Bracknell.  The christenings, sir!  Is not that somewhat premature?

Chasuble.  [Looking rather puzzled, and pointing to Jack and Algernon.]
Both these gentlemen have expressed a desire for immediate baptism.

Lady Bracknell.  At their age?  The idea is grotesque and irreligious!
Algernon, I forbid you to be baptized.  I will not hear of such excesses.
Lord Bracknell would be highly displeased if he learned that that was the
way in which you wasted your time and money.

Chasuble.  Am I to understand then that there are to be no christenings
at all this afternoon?

Jack.  I don't think that, as things are now, it would be of much
practical value to either of us, Dr. Chasuble.

Chasuble.  I am grieved to hear such sentiments from you, Mr. Worthing.
They savour of the heretical views of the Anabaptists, views that I have
completely refuted in four of my unpublished sermons.  However, as your
present mood seems to be one peculiarly secular, I will return to the
church at once.  Indeed, I have just been informed by the pew-opener that
for the last hour and a half Miss Prism has been waiting for me in the
vestry.

Lady Bracknell.  [Starting.]  Miss Prism!  Did I hear you mention a Miss
Prism?

Chasuble.  Yes, Lady Bracknell.  I am on my way to join her.

Lady Bracknell.  Pray allow me to detain you for a moment.  This matter
may prove to be one of vital importance to Lord Bracknell and myself.  Is
this Miss Prism a female of repellent aspect, remotely connected with
education?

Chasuble.  [Somewhat indignantly.]  She is the most cultivated of ladies,
and the very picture of respectability.

Lady Bracknell.  It is obviously the same person.  May I ask what
position she holds in your household?

Chasuble.  [Severely.]  I am a celibate, madam.

Jack.  [Interposing.]  Miss Prism, Lady Bracknell, has been for the last
three years Miss Cardew's esteemed governess and valued companion.

Lady Bracknell.  In spite of what I hear of her, I must see her at once.
Let her be sent for.

Chasuble.  [Looking off.]  She approaches; she is nigh.

[Enter Miss Prism hurriedly.]

Miss Prism.  I was told you expected me in the vestry, dear Canon.  I
have been waiting for you there for an hour and three-quarters.  [Catches
sight of Lady Bracknell, who has fixed her with a stony glare.  Miss
Prism grows pale and quails.  She looks anxiously round as if desirous to
escape.]

Lady Bracknell.  [In a severe, judicial voice.]  Prism!  [Miss Prism bows
her head in shame.]  Come here, Prism!  [Miss Prism approaches in a
humble manner.]  Prism!  Where is that baby?  [General consternation.  The
Canon starts back in horror.  Algernon and Jack pretend to be anxious to
shield Cecily and Gwendolen from hearing the details of a terrible public
scandal.]  Twenty-eight years ago, Prism, you left Lord Bracknell's
house, Number 104, Upper Grosvenor Street, in charge of a perambulator
that contained a baby of the male sex.  You never returned.  A few weeks
later, through the elaborate investigations of the Metropolitan police,
the perambulator was discovered at midnight, standing by itself in a
remote corner of Bayswater.  It contained the manuscript of a
three-volume novel of more than usually revolting sentimentality.  [Miss
Prism starts in involuntary indignation.]  But the baby was not there!
[Every one looks at Miss Prism.]  Prism!  Where is that baby?  [A pause.]

Miss Prism.  Lady Bracknell, I admit with shame that I do not know.  I
only wish I did.  The plain facts of the case are these.  On the morning
of the day you mention, a day that is for ever branded on my memory, I
prepared as usual to take the baby out in its perambulator.  I had also
with me a somewhat old, but capacious hand-bag in which I had intended to
place the manuscript of a work of fiction that I had written during my
few unoccupied hours.  In a moment of mental abstraction, for which I
never can forgive myself, I deposited the manuscript in the basinette,
and placed the baby in the hand-bag.

Jack.  [Who has been listening attentively.]  But where did you deposit
the hand-bag?

Miss Prism.  Do not ask me, Mr. Worthing.

Jack.  Miss Prism, this is a matter of no small importance to me.  I
insist on knowing where you deposited the hand-bag that contained that
infant.

Miss Prism.  I left it in the cloak-room of one of the larger railway
stations in London.

Jack.  What railway station?

Miss Prism.  [Quite crushed.]  Victoria.  The Brighton line.  [Sinks into
a chair.]

Jack.  I must retire to my room for a moment.  Gwendolen, wait here for
me.

Gwendolen.  If you are not too long, I will wait here for you all my
life.  [Exit Jack in great excitement.]

Chasuble.  What do you think this means, Lady Bracknell?

Lady Bracknell.  I dare not even suspect, Dr. Chasuble.  I need hardly
tell you that in families of high position strange coincidences are not
supposed to occur.  They are hardly considered the thing.

[Noises heard overhead as if some one was throwing trunks about.  Every
one looks up.]

Cecily.  Uncle Jack seems strangely agitated.

Chasuble.  Your guardian has a very emotional nature.

Lady Bracknell.  This noise is extremely unpleasant.  It sounds as if he
was having an argument.  I dislike arguments of any kind.  They are
always vulgar, and often convincing.

Chasuble.  [Looking up.]  It has stopped now.  [The noise is redoubled.]

Lady Bracknell.  I wish he would arrive at some conclusion.

Gwendolen.  This suspense is terrible.  I hope it will last.  [Enter Jack
with a hand-bag of black leather in his hand.]

Jack.  [Rushing over to Miss Prism.]  Is this the hand-bag, Miss Prism?
Examine it carefully before you speak.  The happiness of more than one
life depends on your answer.

Miss Prism.  [Calmly.]  It seems to be mine.  Yes, here is the injury it
received through the upsetting of a Gower Street omnibus in younger and
happier days.  Here is the stain on the lining caused by the explosion of
a temperance beverage, an incident that occurred at Leamington.  And
here, on the lock, are my initials.  I had forgotten that in an
extravagant mood I had had them placed there.  The bag is undoubtedly
mine.  I am delighted to have it so unexpectedly restored to me.  It has
been a great inconvenience being without it all these years.

Jack.  [In a pathetic voice.]  Miss Prism, more is restored to you than
this hand-bag.  I was the baby you placed in it.

Miss Prism.  [Amazed.]  You?

Jack.  [Embracing her.]  Yes . . . mother!

Miss Prism.  [Recoiling in indignant astonishment.]  Mr. Worthing!  I am
unmarried!

Jack.  Unmarried!  I do not deny that is a serious blow.  But after all,
who has the right to cast a stone against one who has suffered?  Cannot
repentance wipe out an act of folly?  Why should there be one law for
men, and another for women?  Mother, I forgive you.  [Tries to embrace
her again.]

Miss Prism.  [Still more indignant.]  Mr. Worthing, there is some error.
[Pointing to Lady Bracknell.]  There is the lady who can tell you who you
really are.

Jack.  [After a pause.]  Lady Bracknell, I hate to seem inquisitive, but
wLadyBracknellThatsoundsnotunsatisfactoryThreeaddressesalwaysinspireconfidenceevenintradesmenButwhatproofhaveIoftheirauthenticityJackIhavecarefullypreservedtheCourtGuidesoftheperiodTheyareopentoyourinspectionLadyBracknellLadyBracknellGrimlyIhaveknownstrangeerrorsinthatpublicationJackMissCardewsfamilysolicitorsareMessrsMarkbyMarkbyandMarkbyLadyBracknellMarkbyMarkbyandMarkbyAfirmoftheveryhighestpositionintheirprofessionIndeedIamtoldthatoneoftheMrMarkbysisoccasionallytobeseenatdinnerpartiesSofarIamsatisfiedJackVeryirritablyHowextremelykindofyouLadyBracknellIhavealsoinmypossessionyouwillbepleasedtohearcertificatesofMissCardewsbirthbaptismwhoopingcoughregistrationvaccinationconfirmationandthemeaslesboththeGermanandtheEnglishvarietyLadyBracknellAhAlifecrowdedwithincidentIseethoughperhapssomewhattooexcitingforayounggirlIamnotmyselfinfavourofprematureexperiencesRiseslooksatherwatchGwendolenthetimeapproachesforourdepartureWehavenotamomenttoloseAsamatterofformMrWorthingIhadbetteraskyouifMissCardewhasanylittlefortuneJackOhaboutahundredandthirtythousandpoundsintheFundsThatisallGoodbyeLadyBracknellSopleasedtohaveseenyouLadyBracknellSittingdownagainAmomentMrWorthingAhundredandthirtythousandpoundsAndintheFundsMissCardewseemstomeamostattractiveyoungladynowthatIlookatherFewgirlsofthepresentdayhaveanyreallysolidqualitiesanyofthequalitiesthatlastandimprovewithtimeWeliveIregrettosayinanageofsurfacesToCecilyComeoverheredearCecilygoesacrossPrettychildyourdressissadlysimpleandyourhairseemsalmostasNaturemighthaveleftitButwecansoonalterallthatAthoroughlyexperiencedFrenchmaidproducesareallymarvellousresultinaverybriefspaceoftimeIrememberrecommendingonetoyoungLadyLancingandafterthreemonthsherownhusbanddidnotknowherJackAndaftersixmonthsnobodyknewherLadyBracknellGlaresatJackforafewmomentsThenbendswithapractisedsmiletoCecilyKindlyturnroundsweetchildCecilyturnscompletelyroundNothesideviewiswhatIwantCecilypresentsherprofileYesquiteasIexpectedTherearedistinctsocialpossibilitiesinyourprofileThetwoweakpointsinourageareitswantofprincipleanditswantofprofileThechinalittlehigherdearStylelargelydependsonthewaythechiniswornTheyarewornveryhighjustatpresentAlgernonAlgernonYesAuntAugustaLadyBracknellTherearedistinctsocialpossibilitiesinMissCardewsprofileAlgernonCecilyisthesweetestdearestprettiestgirlinthewholeworldAndIdontcaretwopenceaboutsocialpossibilitiesLadyBracknellNeverspeakdisrespectfullyofSocietyAlgernonOnlypeoplewhocantgetintoitdothatToCecilyDearchildofcourseyouknowthatAlgernonhasnothingbuthisdebtstodependuponButIdonotapproveofmercenarymarriagesWhenImarriedLordBracknellIhadnofortuneofanykindButIneverdreamedforamomentofallowingthattostandinmywayWellIsupposeImustgivemyconsentAlgernonThankyouAuntAugustaLadyBracknellCecilyyoumaykissmeCecilyKissesherThankyouLadyBracknellLadyBracknellYoumayalsoaddressmeasAuntAugustaforthefutureCecilyThankyouAuntAugustaLadyBracknellThemarriageIthinkhadbettertakeplacequitesoonAlgernonThankyouAuntAugustaCecilyThankyouAuntAugustaLadyBracknellTospeakfranklyIamnotinfavouroflongengagementsTheygivepeopletheopportunityoffindingouteachotherscharacterfivearemarkwhichIamboundtosayseemstometoshowasomewhatimpatientnatureIwouldbegofyoutoreconsideryourdecisionJackButmydearLadyBracknellthematterisentirelyinyourownhandsThemomentyouconsenttomymarriagewithGwendolenIwillmostgladlyallowyournephewtoformanalliancewithmywardLadyBracknellRisinganddrawingherselfupYoumustbequiteawarethatwhatyouproposeisoutofthequestionJackThenapassionatecelibacyisallthatanyofuscanlookforwardtoLadyBracknellThatisnotthedestinyIproposeforGwendolenAlgernonofcoursecanchooseforhimselfPullsoutherwatchComedearGwendolenriseswehavealreadymissedfiveifnotsixtrainsTomissanymoremightexposeustocommentontheplatformEnterDrChasubleChasubleEverythingisquitereadyforthechristeningsLadyBracknellThechristeningssirIsnotthatsomewhatprematureChasubleLookingratherpuzzledandpointingtoJackandAlgernonBoththesegentlemenhaveexpressedadesireforimmediatebaptismLadyBracknellAttheirageTheideaisgrotesqueandirreligiousAlgernonIforbidyoutobebaptizedIwillnothearofsuchexcessesLordBracknellwouldbehighlydispleasedifhelearnedthatthatwasthewayinwhichyouwastedyourtimeandmoneyChasubleAmItounderstandthenthattherearetobenochristeningsatallthisafternoonJackIdontthinkthatasthingsarenowitwouldbeofmuchpracticalvaluetoeitherofusDrChasubleChasubleIamgrievedtohearsuchsentimentsfromyouMrWorthingTheysavourofthehereticalviewsoftheAnabaptistsviewsthatIhavecompletelyrefutedinfourofmyunpublishedsermonsHoweverasyourpresentmoodseemstobeonepeculiarlysecularIwillreturntothechurchatonceIndeedIhavejustbeeninformedbythepewopenerthatforthelasthourandahalfMissPrismhasbeenwaitingformeinthevestryLadyBracknellStartingMissPrismDidIhearyoumentionaMissPrismChasubleYesLadyBracknellIamonmywaytojoinherLadyBracknellPrayallowmetodetainyouforamomentThismattermayprovetobeoneofvitalimportancetoLordBracknellandmyselfIsthisMissPrismafemaleofrepellentaspectremotelyconnectedwitheducationChasubleSomewhatindignantlySheisthemostcultivatedofladiesandtheverypictureofrespectabilityLadyBracknellItisobviouslythesamepersonMayIaskwhatpositionsheholdsinyourhouseholdChasubleSeverelyIamacelibatemadamJackInterposingMissPrismLadyBracknellhasbeenforthelastthreeyearsMissCardewsesteemedgovernessandvaluedcompanionLadyBracknellInspiteofwhatIhearofherImustseeheratonceLetherbesentforChasubleLookingoffSheapproachessheisnighEnterMissPrismhurriedlyMissPrismIwastoldyouexpectedmeinthevestrydearCanonIhavebeenwaitingforyouthereforanhourandthreequartersCatchessightofLadyBracknellwhohasfixedherwithastonyglareMissPrismgrowspaleandquailsShelooksanxiouslyroundasifdesiroustoescapeLadyBracknellInaseverejudicialvoicePrismMissPrismbowsherheadinshameComeherePrismMissPrismapproachesinahumblemannerPrismWhereisthatbabyGeneralconsternationTheCanonstartsbackinhorrorAlgernonandJackpretendtobeanxioustoshieldCecilyandGwendolenfromhearingthedetailsofaterriblepublicscandalTwentyeightyearsagoPrismyouleftLordBracknellshouseNumberUpperGrosvenorStreetinchargeofaperambulatorthatcontainedababyofthemalesexYouneverreturnedAfewweekslaterthroughtheelaborateinvestigationsoftheMetropolitanpolicetheperambulatorwasdiscoveredatmidnightstandingbyitselfinaremotecornerofBayswaterItcontainedthemanuscriptofathreevolumenovelofmorethanusuallyrevoltingsentimentalityMissPrismstartsininvoluntaryindignationButthebabywasnotthereEveryonelooksatMissPrismPrismWhereisthatbabyApauseMissPrismLadyBracknellIadmitwithshamethatIdonotknowIonlywishIdidTheplainfactsofthecasearetheseOnthemorningofthedayyoumentionadaythatisforeverbrandedonmymemoryIpreparedasusualtotakethebabyoutinitsperambulatorIhadalsowithmeasomewhatoldbutcapacioushandbaginwhichIhadintendedtoplacethemanuscriptofaworkoffictionthatIhadwrittenduringmyfewunoccupiedhoursInamomentofmentalabstractionforwhichInevercanforgivemyselfIdepositedthemanuscriptinthebasinetteandplacedthebabyinthehandbagJackWhohasbeenlisteningattentivelyButwheredidyoudepositthehandbagMissPrismDonotaskmeMrWorthingJackMissPrismthisisamatterofnosmallimportancetomeIinsistonknowingwhereyoudepositedthehandbagthatcontainedthatinfantMissPrismIleftitinthecloakroomofoneofthelargerrailwaystationsinLondonJackWhatrailwaystationMissPrismQuitecrushedVictoriaTheBrightonlineSinksintoachairJackImustretiretomyroomforamomentGwendolenwaithereformeGwendolenIfyouarenottoolongIwillwaithereforyouallmylifeExitJackingreatexcitementChasubleWhatdoyouthinkthismeansLadyBracknellLadyBracknellIdarenotevensuspectDrChasubleIneedhardlytellyouthatinfamiliesofhighpositionstrangecoincidencesarenotsupposedtooccurTheyarehardlyconsideredthethingNoisesheardoverheadasifsomeonewasthrowingtrunksaboutEveryonelooksupCecilyUncleJackseemsstrangelyagitatedChasubleYourguardianhasaveryemotionalnatureLadyBracknellThisnoiseisextremelyunpleasantItsoundsasifhewashavinganargumentIdislikeargumentsofanykindTheyarealwaysvulgarandoftenconvincingChasubleLookingupIthasstoppednowThenoiseisredoubledLadyBracknellIwishhewouldarriveatsomeconclusionGwendolenThissuspenseisterribleIhopeitwilllastEnterJackwithahandbagofblackleatherinhishandJackRushingovertoMissPrismIsthisthehandbagMissPrismExamineitcarefullybeforeyouspeakThehappinessofmorethanonelifedependsonyouranswerMissPrismCalmlyItseemstobemineYeshereistheinjuryitreceivedthroughtheupsettingofaGowerStreetomnibusinyoungerandhappierdaysHereisthestainontheliningcausedbytheexplosionofatemperancebeverageanincidentthatoccurredatLeamingtonAndhereonthelockaremyinitialsIhadforgottenthatinanextravagantmoodIhadhadthemplacedthereThebagisundoubtedlymineIamdelightedtohaveitsounexpectedlyrestoredtomeIthasbeenagreatinconveniencebeingwithoutitalltheseyearsJackInapatheticvoiceMissPrismmoreisrestoredtoyouthanthishandbagIwasthebabyyouplacedinitMissPrismAmazedYouJackEmbracingherYesmotherMissPrismRecoilinginindignantastonishmentMrWorthingIamunmarriedJackUnmarriedIdonotdenythatisaseriousblowButafterallwhohastherighttocastastoneagainstonewhohassufferedCannotrepentancewipeoutanactoffollyWhyshouldtherebeonelawformenandanotherforwomenMotherIforgiveyouTriestoembraceheragainMissPrismStillmoreindignantMrWorthingthereissomeerrorPointingtoLadyBracknellThereistheladywhocantellyouwhoyoureallyareJackAfterapauseLadyBracknellIhatetoseeminquisitivebutw